
===== START FILE: 2_BESCOM_SRTPV_tariff_OM.pdf =====
[No text extracted]

===== END FILE: 2_BESCOM_SRTPV_tariff_OM.pdf =====

===== START FILE: atr-english-final.pdf =====
 
 
BRUHATH BENGALURU MAHANAGARA PALIKE  
 
 
 
 
2024 -25 
PERFORMANACE REPORT  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
BRUHAT BENGALURU MAHANAGARA PALIKE PERFORMANCE REPORT OF 2024 -25 
 
Page | 21  
 Administration  
1. As part of de -centralization of power, to further strengthen 
the administration in the zones and with a view to bring the 
administrative machinery closer to the Citizens,  Senior IAS 
officers have been appointed as Zonal Commissioners in all 8 
Zones. Financial and Technical powers have been delegated 
to Zonal Commissioners and other officials . 
2. In order to ensure  citizens ’ participation in Governance and 
to observe the role of Ward Committees in Local Planning and 
Administration, Zonal Committees have been formed  in each 
zone for the administration and management of 225 wards 
formed  in accordance with the BBMP  Act -2020 . Accordingly,  
Nodal officer ha s been appointed for each ward  and he/she is 
to be  present in the ward along with other officers on every 
Wednesday to resolve the grievances of the public.  
3. For amendment of  BBMP Cadre an d Recruitment Rules, a 
draft has been prepared and the same will be submitted to 
the Government .    
4. BBMP has commenced the process of rec ruitment of Direct 
Payment System Pourakarmikas  for the 3673 vacant and 
11307 supernumerary posts through Special Direct 
Recruitment.  After receiving  Validity Certificates and Police 
verification reports  from the Competent Authorities, further 
action will be taken as per the decision of Selection 
Committee.    
5. New transfer policy has been approved by Government and 
has come into effect from 04-07-2024. Accordingly, around 
1,000 officers/staff s have been transferred through 
counseling  in a transparent manner. Action is being taken to 
review and implement the recommendations of reports of the  
Administrative Reforms Commission submitted by Sri. T.M.  
Vijay Bhaskar , Retd. Chief Secretary (IAS) .  
6. It is intended to establish a Society by name “Pensioners’ 
Arogya Kalyana Nidhi Scheme”  and to maintain corpus fund  
to facilitate the welfare of the  retired  employees of BBMP . The 
 
BRUHAT BENGALURU MAHANAGARA PALIKE PERFORMANCE REPORT OF 2024 -25 
 
Page | 22  
 proposal has been submitted to Government with the 
approval of Hon’ble Administrator of BBMP.   
Revenue  
7. An Information Technology (I T) Cell with state  of the  art 
facilities equipped with robust systems and mechanism  has 
been operationalized . A Contactless  and Faceless online e -
khata system is adopted , in which  e-khatas for more than 2 5 
Lakh manual khatas are in live . E-khata System gives 
Aadhaar based automatic Mutations and is secure and 
sanitized by block chain  technology . 
8. BBMP has achieved highest property tax collection in the 
country in FY 2023 -24 with the overall collection of Rs.3,944 
crores . For the year 2024 -25, till February 2025, Rs.4,541.75 
crores p roperty tax  has been collected.  Introduction of OTS 
Scheme  (One Time Settlement) has yielded tremendous 
success. Rs. 1,277 crores arrears  of property tax  have been 
recovered from 22nd February 2024 to 30th November 2024 
has led  to record property tax collection.  
9. BBMP (Estate Management) Rules 2024 promulga ted and 
expected to yield about Rs. 100 c rores in lease revenues 
besides proper management of 6 ,818 properties.  
10. The Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike Act - 2020  has 
been amended  and Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike  
(Property tax Assessment, Recovery and Management) Rules 
are promulgated which  has streamlined the procedures . 
 
Government Grants  
 
11. State Government grant of Rs.3,475.97 crores was expected 
during  FY 2024 -25. Till the end the February 2025, 
Rs.2,817.96  crores of Government grants  have been received . 
The final installment  of Rs. 750 crores is expected to be 
released  by Government of Karnataka (GOK ).  
 
 
 
BRUHAT BENGALURU MAHANAGARA PALIKE PERFORMANCE REPORT OF 2024 -25 
 
Page | 23  
 Town Planning   
 
12. The final notification regarding the amendment to Zoning 
Regulations on Premium FAR (Floor Area Ratio) is issued by 
the Government of Karnataka . The policy will be implemented 
and building plans will be approved with Premium FAR upon 
payment of Premium FAR  charges. The revenue collected 
from Premium FAR  charges will be utilized exclusively for 
infrastructure development . This provision allows Owners 
and Developers to utilize  additional FAR beyond the 
permissible limit, facilitating optimized land use and 
sustainable urban growth.  
Information and Technology(IT)  
 
13. In order to provide quality services to the public using the  
information technolog y, the IT section was able  to implement 
various softwares as  planned in the last year and they are 
listed  as below.  
I. The e -Aasthi system has been developed which 
provides revenue services such as Khata 
registration , issuance of khata,  multi -unit khata 
issuance.   The GIS mapping of the properties in the 
BBMP  is also incorporated . 
II. As assured in the last year, the digitization  of the 25  
lakhs  propert y records is completed and the draft e-
khata is made available on the BBMP  e-Aasthi 
website.  
III. Public s have been provided with the opportunity to 
view their  e-Khata through online so that they can 
check and correct any errors  in their e -khatas. To 
secure  e-khathas , Aadha ar seeding  is enabled.   
IV. For the convenience of the public, a separate 
helpline has  been opened for assisting  information  
/clarifications  / complaints regarding  the process 
related to e -khatha . 
V. BCCMS software is developed for the management 
of litigations / appeals related to the revenue 
 
BRUHAT BENGALURU MAHANAGARA PALIKE PERFORMANCE REPORT OF 2024 -25 
 
Page | 24  
 department of BBMP  and will be launched in the 
next year and it is intended to integrate the said 
system with the e -Aasthi software.  
VI. Action has been taken to implement the Court Case 
Management   System (CCMS)  of E- Governance 
Department of GOK in BBMP to monitor and 
manage the court cases.  
VII. A Software has been developed by the Information 
Technology Section  for registration of Advertisement 
Agencies, application for advertisement license, 
payment of fees and permissions for advertisement 
display. The said software will be used mandatorily 
for the implementation of the New Advertisement 
Bye-law 2024  which is ready for promulgation  in 
2025 -26. 
VIII. The Fix Pothole Software was launched in beginning 
of this year to facilitate the process of identifying 
and closing potholes in BBMP areas has been 
successful . So far, 20,235 applications have been 
processed with 11,309 potholes fixed, 6,249 false 
cases  were rejected and 1,449 potholes are in 
progress to be fixed .  
IX. The OFC and Telecom Software s have been 
upgraded as per the new R OW (Right of Ways)  Policy 
of the Central Government.  
X. A one -month pilot project to identify the issues in 
civic infrastructure using artificial intelligence 
technology ( AI) has been successfully implemented.  
The tender proces s for AI Based video feed analysis 
for identification and analysis of civic infrastructure 
issues in BBMP by  utilizing  the 6000 cameras 
installed under the Safe City Project and 250 dash 
cameras which shall be installed on B BMP vehicles 
is near completion .  The  information available from 
the Artificial Intelligence (AI) software will be 
integrated with the BBMP’s  existing Sahaaya 
Software and I ntegrated Command and Control 
Center  (ICCC) . 
 
BRUHAT BENGALURU MAHANAGARA PALIKE PERFORMANCE REPORT OF 2024 -25 
 
Page | 25  
 XI. Integration of the BBMP online service with EODB : 
Action has been initiated to integrate BBMP’s 
various softwares under EODB.   Karnataka 
Government has mandated that the services 
provided to the citizen by BBMP should 
compulsorily be provided through online. In this 
regard , many important services such a s e-khatha, 
building plan approval, telecom permission, tree 
cutting services are provided through online. Except 
for the Trade license all the above services are also 
integrated with the single window system of 
Karnataka Udyog Mitra . 
Education  
 
14. Under BBMP’s Education Department, ab out 23,341 
students are studying in 93  Nursery Schools, 16  Primary 
Schools, 34  High Schools, 19  P.U. Colleges, 04  Graduate  
Colleges  and 02  Post Graduate Colleges.  
15. The School Development and Monitoring Committee (SDMC) 
and Co llege Development Committees (CDC) are made 
functional in all the schools and colleges of BBMP  from the 
academic year 2024 -25. SDMCs and CDCs facilitate 
community participation in school management, ensuring 
greater accountability, transparency, and improv ed quality of 
education by allowing parents, local leaders and other 
stakeholders to actively contribute for decision -making 
regarding the school's development and address issues 
directly impacting their children's learning environment. The 
SDMC members ha ve been given training through two 
workshops on school related matters in collaboration with 
the Azim Premji Foundation.  
16. All school and college students were provided with two sets of 
uniform, shoes and socks, notebooks, textbooks, Sweaters, 
School bags an d a Mid -day meal at the cost of 
Rs.12,90,89,698/ -.For better learning experience , for the first 
time, new teaching materials, playing materials, and playing 
 
BRUHAT BENGALURU MAHANAGARA PALIKE PERFORMANCE REPORT OF 2024 -25 
 
Page | 26  
 mats were provided to Nursery schools at the cost of 
Rs.39,41,801/ -. Monitors have been hired to improve 
teaching methodologies in Nursery and Primary schools. Age 
group -wise library books and sports equipment were 
provided at the cost of Rs.42,98,024/ -  
17. Pratham Education Foundation, in partnership with Bruhat 
Bengaluru Mahanagara  Palike (BBMP), has b een 
implementing a learning improvement program from June 
2023, to enhance children's learning outcomes from Nursery 
to Upper Primary Grades. Pratham  Education Foundation  
actively supports BBMP schools by employing its evidence -
based teaching -learning meth odology, teaching -learning 
content/material and program design. The program's 
objective is to enhance the learning levels of children from 
Nursery to Upper Primary grades, to catalyze  systemic 
change by strengthening the monitoring capacities of the 
BBMP m onitoring cadre and to build teacher capacity 
through training and mentoring for effective implementation 
of the program and enhanced in -classroom delivery. The 
intervention has been implemented in 16 primary schools 
and 93 nursery schools under the BBMP r eaching 260 
teachers and 7,766 children across the district of Bengaluru.  
18. Teacher training has been given prime importance in the last 
2 years. 91 Mathematics and Science teachers of 34 -high 
schools participated  in the 5 -day training session at the IISc  
at Kudapura. 34  Kannada, 39  English, 29  Hindi, 63  Social 
Science and 25  Physical Education teachers of high schools 
were given 5 days refreshment subject wise workshop by 
District Education Training Institute (DIET) where 190 
teachers participated.  
19. BBMP ed ucation department is procuring laboratory 
equipment to 05 P re-University  science colleges at the cost of 
Rs.1.00 crore s. To keep the science labs functional , new 
furniture  were provided  to 76 schools/colleges at the cost of 
Rs.1,17,67,540/ -. Another 40 schools are being provided 
with furniture at the cost of Rs.1,50,99,700/ -. Also, 534 
 
BRUHAT BENGALURU MAHANAGARA PALIKE PERFORMANCE REPORT OF 2024 -25 
 
Page | 27  
 Computers and 72 printers have been procured and 
distributed to 48 schools/colleges of the BBMP.  
20. Repairs and renovations work in schools and col leges have 
been taken up at the cost of Rs.18 crores . The work targets 
improved  toilets, drinking water facilities, rainwater 
harvesting structures, development of 10 new playgrounds, 
civil repairs and face-lifting  of nursery schools.  
21. BBMP collaborated wit h the Karnataka State Tourism 
Development Corporation (KSTDC), to provide a better 
experience to BBMP school and college students,  by taking 
them on educational excursions to various historical, cultural 
and eco spots of Karnataka. To ensure co -curricular and 
extra -curricular activities, cultural programs on Teachers 
Day, Independence Day, Gandhi  Jayanti, Karnataka 
Rajyot hsava, Republic  days were organized  to give an 
opportunity to all children to grow and learn outside of 
classrooms as well.  
22. A total incentive of Rs.1,00,70,000/ - was awarded to 306 
students as incentive for achieving highest ranks in 10th S td, 
2nd P.U. (12th)  and final d egree. 73 SSLC  students were 
awarded Rs.25,000/ - each, 227 P .U. students were awarded 
Rs.35,000/ - each and 06 final year Degree students were 
awarded Rs.50,000/ - each who passed in distinction in the 
financial year 2023 -24.  
23. Major focus is being put on teachers’ performance. Subject 
inspectors have been deployed for daily rounds to ensure 
teachers  perform the ideal teaching and  are guided timely. 
School heads are being regularly guided on administrative 
and financial responsib ilities and duties in schools to ensure 
better governance. BBMP has also started biomet ric face 
identification and geo -fenced attendance systems for all 
school and college teachers /lectures  (for permanent and 
temporary  both)  to ensure discipline in schools . 
 
 
 
BRUHAT BENGALURU MAHANAGARA PALIKE PERFORMANCE REPORT OF 2024 -25 
 
Page | 28  
 Animal Husbandry  
 
24. As a part of animal birth control program , 30,756  dogs have 
been neutered and 65 ,831 dogs have been vaccinated with 
Anti Rabies vaccine . BBMP became the first corporation to 
launch the combined vaccination for street dogs for 5 
diseases under which 1 ,84,000 plus dogs will be 
administered this vaccine over a period of one year . The 
process to rescue injured dogs  has been initiated in 3 zones  
namely Dasarahalli, Yalahanka and South. Microchipping for 
stray dogs has been started to ensure better vaccination 
coverage and avoid relocation of street dogs. BBMP became 
the first corporation to start feeding its stray dogs on pilot 
basis. More than 1 ,000 dogs are being fed in coordination 
with Health and Sanitation Department,  Animal Husba ndry 
Department, local restaurants owners and animal welfare 
volunteers in specific areas. Special center for birth control 
surgeries for canine distemper recovered dogs has been 
started in R aja Rajeshwari Nagar zone.  IEC activities through 
methods of flash mobs and street plays have been conducted 
at more than 200 locations which has caught the imagination 
of one and all.  
 
Welfare   
 
25. Street vendor’s survey has been successfully completed in 
which more than 27 ,500 street vendors are identified across 
the city. Educational fee has been reimbursed for 850 
candidates. 48-Night shelters are being run which has hosted 
more than 6,300 needy persons. More than 3,450 women 
have been trained for sewing skills. 17 various organizations 
involved in diverse cultural and social activities have been 
supported with an aid of Rs.1,76,00,000/ -. 
 
 
 
 
BRUHAT BENGALURU MAHANAGARA PALIKE PERFORMANCE REPORT OF 2024 -25 
 
Page | 29  
 Project  
 
26. Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara  Palike had intended  to build 
a 250  meter High Sky D eck with the view to promote tourism , 
showcasing the Bengaluru city’s modernity , employment 
generation and increase the revenues.  In 20 24-25 budget 
speech, grant of Rs.50 cr ores was provided for preliminary 
project implementation.  Hemmigepura (near NI CE Clover 
Leaf) has been proposed as the preliminary location for the 
proposed 250-meter sky deck.  Public Notice is issued f or any 
objections or suggestions regarding the proposed 
construction of the sky deck in Hemmigepura . Scrutiny of 
received public  objections and suggestions are under 
process.  
27. Approximately , 200 km of roads within the  jurisdiction of the 
BBMP have already been white -topped  which has received 
positive feedback and public appreciation for its effectiveness. 
An additional 150 km of roads are being developed with 
white -topping from the year 2023 -24. The project is 
implemen ted with the objective  of prevent ion of road 
excavations in the future and ensure pothole -free roads. 
Under this project, roads will be developed comprehensively 
to meet the highest standards with up -gradation of road side 
storm water drains and BWSSB pipelines and additionally 
pipe ducts will be installed to accommodate BESCOM and 
OFC cables, ensuring a systematic and public -friendly 
footpath.  
Horticulture  
 
28. Parks provide a vital green space in a rapidly developing 
urban environment, offering residents  a place for recreation, 
relaxation and connection with nature, while also 
contributing to biodiversity conservation, improved air 
quality and mitigating the urban heat island effect, all crucial 
for the well -being of the city’s inhabitants; essentially ac ting 
as the “lungs” of the city, especially given Bengaluru ’s 
 
BRUHAT BENGALURU MAHANAGARA PALIKE PERFORMANCE REPORT OF 2024 -25 
 
Page | 30  
 historical reputation as the “Garden City of India”.  BBMP is 
currently maintaining about 1 ,280 parks.  A grant of Rs .83 
crores is allocated in the financial year 2024 -25 for 
maintenance of parks and median, and for providing of 
security.  
29. In order to make parks more accessible to all  citizens , BBMP 
took a landmark decision to keep the parks open between 5 
am till 10 pm.  
30. Under the “Brand Bengaluru -Green Ben galuru ” program, 
works worth Rs. 40 crores are under progress for development 
of new parks, up -gradation of existing parks, constructing 
water harvesting and storage structures in parks and 
provisioning of leaf composters. An amount of Rs.15  crores  
were allocated under 15th  Finance Commission Grants for 
development of 14 New Parks, for which the works are under 
progress. In order to improve the ground  water table in 
parks, more than 750 percolation pits have been constructed 
in parks.  
31. In order to secure the boundaries of the  Parks from 
encroachments, around Rs. 32 crores are being spent to fence 
and secure 30 parks. Works are under progress in  another  
18 locations.  
32. A Mobile and a web application named Hasiru Mitra (Park 
Monitoring System) has been developed by BBMP 
Horticulture wing in coordination with the IT team, to 
monitor the maintenance of parks by the agencies appointed  
by BBMP through a tender process. The ci tizens can either 
choose to visit the website and visit the parks inspection 
reports made online, or enroll  as a “Hasiru Mitra - Volunteer” 
to help in inspecting and monitoring the maintenance of 
parks.  
33. Community Involvement for Park Conservation Policy (CI PC) 
is framed in order to enable stakeholders to contribute funds, 
facilities, assets and assist BBMP in providing services to the 
citizens and also for more development of Bengaluru. 48 
 
BRUHAT BENGALURU MAHANAGARA PALIKE PERFORMANCE REPORT OF 2024 -25 
 
Page | 31  
 parks and medians are already given for adoption under this 
policy.  
Solid Waste Management  
 
34. The state government, under the "Brand Bengaluru" concept, 
has identified the need for comprehensive solid waste 
management based on feedback from the public, experts and 
various organizations. This includes providing excellent 
facilities and services for waste collection and processing, 
from the source to waste disposal. The necessity for 
"Integrated Solid Waste Management" has been recognized 
and in this regard, the municipal corporation has divided the 
city into four parts (with t wo zones forming one part). In each 
section, waste collection and processing will take place within 
an area of 50 to 100 acres.   The project for "Integrated Solid 
Waste Management" has been approved by the state 
government and the tender is under process. A proposal for 
land acquisition has been submitted to the state government 
and once approved, an allocation of Rs.100 crore s will be 
spent on it.  
35. Under the jurisdiction of the municipal corporation, a total of 
97.82 lakh tons of legacy waste has been accumulated. So 
far, 34.55 lakh tons of this waste has been processed 
through bio -mining at Mandur Phase -1 and bio -remediation 
at Bellahalli.  Currentl y, tenders are in the approval stage for 
processing legacy waste at Mandur Phase -2 and Mavallipura 
sites through bio -mining. Doddabidarakallu and 
Subbarayanapalya Legacy waste management is in the 
tender process . Action plans for waste management at 
Bingip ura & Lakshmipura are under approval  stage .  
36. It is planned to establish secondary scientific waste transfer 
centers of capacity of 150 to 200 metric tons per day in 27 
divisions.  Currently, two such centers are operational viz., 
BTM Layout and Chamarajpet  divisions. At Sarvagnanagar  
division it  is in final  construction phase and will be 
inaugurated soon. Tenders are under approval stage for 
 
BRUHAT BENGALURU MAHANAGARA PALIKE PERFORMANCE REPORT OF 2024 -25 
 
Page | 32  
 establishment of transfer station at  4 other divisions.  To 
establish the transfer stations in remaining divisions, it is 
planned to take up under the Swachh Bharat Mission 2.0 
grants.  
37. Work orders have been issued for the construction of 4 
biogas plants, each with a capacity of 5 tons per day. The 
construction is going  on in Kalyan Nagar of Sarvajna Nagar 
division, Domm aluru of Shantinagar division and 
Koramangala in BTM division, with completion expected by 
the end of March 2025. Additionally, plans are underway to 
build one more unit in the Bommanahalli division. A 50 -ton 
per day capacity unit will be constructed in th e Kogilu village 
of the B yatarayanapura division.  
38. A total of 22 dry waste collection units with a capacity of 3 to 
4 tons per day have been established in the current year. 
This has increased the daily dry waste collection capacity by 
100 tons. A waste -to-energy plant has been commissioned in 
Bidadi, generating 11.5 MW of electricity daily from 
processed waste.  
39. A total of 160 existing public toilets are being upgraded and 
204 new public toilets are being constructed under 5 
packages. Out o f these, work ord ers have been issued for 3 
packages in which construction  of 25 toilets is at the final 
stage of completion. The remaining 2 packages are at the 
tender approval stage. In order to prioritize facility for  
women, 100 women friendly toilets (She Toilets) are being 
planned under 4 packages. Work orders have been issued for 
2 packages, the plans and designs for the toilets are at the 
approval stage. The remaining 2 packages are under  
tender ing stage.  
40. In the Begur Ramanashree Layout of the Bommanahalli 
division, organic waste from 250 houses is being composted 
at the households by the residence themselves . The compost 
produced is being used for gardening purposes . 
41. In the newly formed health & sanitation  wing of the Bruhat 
Bengaluru Mahanagara  Palike, approximately 15,600 
 
BRUHAT BENGALURU MAHANAGARA PALIKE PERFORMANCE REPORT OF 2024 -25 
 
Page | 33  
 pourakarmikas  are employed under a direct payment system. 
Steps have been taken for the recruitment of 12,692 workers  
as per the Government order  and the final selection list has 
been re leased. The recruitment is under process.  
42. Pourakarmikas who are tirelessly working day and night with 
dedication, commitment and integrity in the sanitation efforts 
of Bengaluru city are being recognized and rewarded.  
Health  
  
43. Approval of the government has been obtained for 
implementation of Arogya Bengaluru Scheme under Brand 
Bengaluru campaign and tender has been invited for 
preparation of DPR, which will lead to up -gradation of 19 
hospitals in terms of bed  strength increase d to 270 beds, 
boosting up the diagnostics facilities and providing 60  plus 
tests free of cost, provision of dental services at 26 new 
points.  
44. BBMP  in association with Association for physically  
challenged has provided physiotherapy to more than 600 
children.  
45. An Artificial Intelligence based Save -Mom pilot project has 
been launched in 2 P rimary Health Center s which will lead to 
tracking of High-risk pregnancies to avoid maternal deaths 
and ensuring better vaccination. In order to reduce the 
anemia among pregnant women and to improve hemoglobin 
levels in them , 16,000  FCM injection  doses have been 
procured and are being put to use .  
46. OPD (Out-Patient Department)  services at BBMP ’s Namma 
Clinics have been increased to an average 40  out-patients per 
day by giving wide publicity to the services available at 
Namma Clinics . 
47. Free dialysis facilities have been started at 5 pla ces and it 
has led to benefit more than 1 ,000 People.  
 
 
 
BRUHAT BENGALURU MAHANAGARA PALIKE PERFORMANCE REPORT OF 2024 -25 
 
Page | 34  
 Forest  
 
48. The BBMP Forest Wing’s  Avenue Plantation initiative is 
making significant strides in enhancing Bengaluru 's green 
cover. With support from public, elected representatives, 
corporate organizations, government agencies, and 
educational institutions, 1 ,13,000 saplings have been 
planted across the city in 2024 -25. Major plantations have 
been done in scientific plantations avenues, government open 
land, l akes and parks. The locations have been geo -tagged on 
the Hasiru  Rakshaka website.  
49. The BBMP Forest w ing is managing trees through 30  tree 
canopy management teams, which address tree falls and 
related issues. Additionally, more than 10,000 applications 
have been processed through Sakala and  Sahaya. During 
monsoon, additional rapid response teams are deployed to 
cater to all areas at the  same time.  
50. Under the 15th Finance Commission and BBMP grants, three 
Hi-Tech Nurseries are being established at the cost of Rs.10 
crore s. These nurseries will raise seedlings for planting and 
public distribution.  
51. As per the Hon’ble High Court’s directives, a tree census is 
being carried  out using an App developed by KSRSAC. So far, 
4,69,846 trees have been counted and classified species -wise, 
with data available for public view on  the KGIS -KSRSAC 
website.  
52. Under the  “Brand Bengaluru -Green Bengaluru" initiative, five 
tree parks based on different themes are being developed at a 
total cost of Rs. 11 crore s. Further, an Animal Rescue Unit is 
being built at a cost of Rs .1 crore near Bannerghatta National 
Park. 
Lakes  
 
53. The BBMP  has a total of 183 live lakes in its jurisdiction . 
BBMP's role is to develop, rejuvenate and maintain  these 
lakes. The lakes aid in groundwater recharge, flood control, 
 
BRUHAT BENGALURU MAHANAGARA PALIKE PERFORMANCE REPORT OF 2024 -25 
 
Page | 35  
 protecting the diverse ecosystem and maintaining the city's 
micro climate. Lak es of Bengaluru have a major historical 
and cultural value as well, enhancing the livability of the city.  
54. Out of total live lakes, 136 lakes have already been 
developed. Development works in more than 35 lakes are in 
progress u nder various schemes. Around Rs.40 Crores being 
spent for maintenance of all lakes. For better and effective 
monitoring and supervision of day-to-day maintenance of 
lakes, a “Kere Mitra” mobile and web application is under 
use. This mobile App can be used by BBMP officials to 
monitor and supervise the agencies identified through 
tenders in maintenance of lakes. Citizens may enroll  as “Kere  
Mitras” to volunteer to submit their inspection reports and 
raise it to Lake ’s engineers. These inspecti on reports are 
available for public view. The App also enables complaints 
which can be raised by any citizen on the SAHAYA App. 530 
home  guards have been deployed to provide security to lakes.  
55. BBMP lakes  division has taken up a humongous task of 
protecting  lakes and its premises. The lakes division is 
coordinating with Revenue Department, Survey wing and the 
BBMP zonal engineers to identify and demarcate boundaries 
and remove encroachments. With the BBMP grant of Rs. 40 
crores, the boundary of 27 lakes has b een demarcated and 
secured with chain link fencing. Further, fencing of 29 lakes 
is under progress. 28 lakes have been declared encroachment 
free. 8.5 acres of encroachment has been cleared in 22 lakes 
in the last one year. Survey of 166 lakes  is already c ompleted 
and the rest are under progress.  
56. Under the 15th Finance Commission grants, a grant of Rs.49 
crores have been given for the rejuvenation and development 
of 14 lakes. Under the “Brand Bengaluru -Green Bengaluru” 
grant, Rs.35 crore s were allocated in 2024 -25 Works in 14 
lakes are under progress.  
57. Sluice gates are necessary for crucial control mechanisms for 
regulating water flows, allowing for effective management of 
 
BRUHAT BENGALURU MAHANAGARA PALIKE PERFORMANCE REPORT OF 2024 -25 
 
Page | 36  
 water levels and preventing floods. A total of 11 sluice gates 
have been constructed  and 9 are under construction.   
58. To make our lakes greener , more than 13,000 seedlings have  
been planted in the lake  premises. Focus is being placed on 
development and de -silting of Wetlands.  
59. To ensure better functioning of Sewage Treatme nt Plants, the 
25 STPs in Lakes  premises have been handed over to 
BWSSB. This will ensure timely release of treated water to 
recharge these water bodies.  
60. A “Community Involvement for Lake Conservation Policy” 
(CICL) 2024  has been finalized for Citizen Groups and Private 
Organizations  interested in development of lakes to provide 
various facilities and assets for lakes.  
 
Bengaluru Climate Action Plan (BCAP) – Climate 
Action Cell  (CAC)  
 
61. The Bengaluru Climate Action Cell (CAC) officially 
commenced its operations in February 2024, marking a 
pivotal moment in the city's commitment to addressing 
climate change. The primary objective of the cell is to 
facilitate and spearhead the implementatio n of the Bengaluru 
Climate Action and Resilience Plan (BCAP) within the 
jurisdictional limits of the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara  
Palike. This initiative is designed to be a multi -stakeholder 
driven collaborative process, ensuring that diverse 
perspectives and expertise are integrated into the city's 
climate action strategies.  
The initial phase of the CAC's work was characterized by 
proactive engagement with various stakeholder departments 
to identify and prioritize actions for the effective 
implementation o f the BCAP.  
62. BBMP ’s CAC has taken a big step towards Climate Budgeting 
and Monitoring Evaluation and Reporting (MER) of sector -
wise actions mentioned in the climate action plan. The two 
are intrinsically linked components of effective climate action. 
 
BRUHAT BENGALURU MAHANAGARA PALIKE PERFORMANCE REPORT OF 2024 -25 
 
Page | 37  
 Climat e budgeting integrates climate change considerations 
into Budgetary planning, tracking expenditures aligned with 
mitigation and adaptation goals, while MER provides the 
framework for systematically collecting, analyzing and 
reporting data to assess the pro gress and impact on climate 
by parastatal departments. Together, they ensure that 
financial resources are strategically allocated to achieve 
climate objectives, fostering transparency, accountability and 
evidence -based decision -making for a sustainable fut ure. 
63. One of the major milestones achieved by the CAC was the 
launch of its official website. This platform serves as a central 
hub for information dissemination about the CAC activities 
and meetings, facilitating collaboration among various 
stakeholders an d providing access to resources related to the 
BCAP. The CAC has also developed "Chat with Nisarga," a 
chat-bot on its website that provides information and 
answers queries related to the BCAP and the CAC.  
64. Furthermore, in July 2024, the CAC introduced a f ellowship 
program to bolster the implementation of Bengaluru's climate 
action initiatives. This program has successfully on  boarded 
six fellows, who are now actively contributing to the cell's 
efforts.  
65. The CAC also established the "Friends of CAC" group, a 
diverse network comprising Resident Welfare Associations 
(RWAs), Civil Society Organizations, Corporates, Academic 
institutions and Individual citizens. This platform serves as a 
conduit for knowledge exchange, awareness building and 
enhancing local capacities for BCAP implementation. Several 
rounds of participatory meetings have been conducted to 
update members on ongoing activities and enhance 
networking among the group. Recognizing the importance of 
digital engagement, the CAC has also created a Li nkedIn, X 
(Twitter) and Instagram  account to enhance its visibility and 
engagement with a broader audience and outreach.  
 
 
BRUHAT BENGALURU MAHANAGARA PALIKE PERFORMANCE REPORT OF 2024 -25 
 
Page | 38  
 66. Seeing the severity of the  water crisis in Bengaluru,  the CAC 
launched the mapping process of open wells in the city, 
which would enab le BBMP to protect and review those  wells 
which are dying. More than 50 such locations are now being 
verified by the department for further action.  
67. A physical and a virtual Mapathon was organized to involve 
local community members in using digital technology to 
identify and verify potential green spaces within their 
neighborhood , thereby accelerating the city's greening efforts. 
This helped us identify more than 8,000 new loca tions for 
plantations across the city. A Mapathon Guide  book is also 
launched for reference of citizens, enabling them to 
participate in this exercise.  
68. Additionally, a Data -jam was conducted, bringing together 
twenty -five participants, including urban plan ners, GIS 
experts, software developers, and active citizens, to analyze 
satellite surface temperature data from the hottest months. 
This analysis aimed to correlate surface temperature data 
with land -use patterns, green cover and socio -economic 
demographic s across four diverse wards.  
69. Furthermore, the CAC conducted capacity building 
workshops for stakeholder departments on various topics, 
including waste management enforcement, resilient, 
inclusive, safe and accessible public spaces, Greenhouse Gas 
(GHG) in ventory creation, zero emission areas and climate 
budgeting.  
70. The Blue -Green Awards have been instituted to recognize 
individuals and organizations making a significant impact in 
advancing Bengaluru's climate action aspirations.  Corporate 
Social Responsibil ity (CSR) Convening was conducted 
recently for engagement of corporates in public works and 
climate related activities.  
71. Through the establishment of strategic partnerships, active 
engagement with stakeholders and the implementation of 
targeted public aware ness campaigns, the CAC has 
demonstrated a comprehensive and collaborative approach to 
 
BRUHAT BENGALURU MAHANAGARA PALIKE PERFORMANCE REPORT OF 2024 -25 
 
Page | 39  
 driving Bengaluru's climate action. The cell's efforts are 
instrumental in ensuring the effective implementation of the 
BCAP and in fostering a sustainable and resilient  future for 
the city.  
Sanitation  
 
72. BBMP has implemented the Pension Scheme for retired DPS 
pourakarmika s who have served for minimum 5 years. As on 
today , 339 pourakarmikas  have been benefited from this 
scheme.   
73. BBMP has provided saree s, aprons, sweaters and track pants 
to 15 ,150 P ourakarmikas.  To facilitate Pourakarmikas to 
take rest during break time and to change uniforms, 181 
Suvidha Cabins ha ve been established.  
74. BBMP has deployed 5 high pressure Power Jetting Road 
Washing Machines to clean main roads.  
Advertisement  
 
75. The New Advertisement Bye -law 2024 proposed by the BBMP 
in order  to permit and to regulate the display of the 
commercial advertisement in transparent manner has been 
approved by the Government and is ready for promulgation. 
The said Bye -law will come into the effect from the year 2025.  
This Bye law facilitates BBMP to earn more revenue as the 
advertisement rights will be awarded through tender/ 
auction procedure.  
76.  The software to implement the provision of the above bye law  
is already developed in -house by the I T department.  
77. To regulate the unauthorized and illegal advertisement , 
provision to impose penalty  to the extent of twice the charges 
normally fixed in auctions and to lodge criminal cases is also 
incorporated  in this bye-law.   
78. By the implementation of the New Advertisement Bye -law, it 
is expected to collect more revenues.   
 
 
BRUHAT BENGALURU MAHANAGARA PALIKE PERFORMANCE REPORT OF 2024 -25 
 
Page | 40  
 Public Relation   
 
79. The Public Relations Department publicizes the importance 
of each service and project implemented by the BBMP to the 
citizens through various media platforms.  
80. Public Relations Department publicizes the property tax, OTS 
services to be paid by citizens wit hin the stipulated period, E -
khata issuance, various treatment facilities available at 
Namma clinics, Solid Waste Management , Welfare and other 
programs widely in various media platforms.  
Estate Division  
 
81. A total of 6,819 properties have been identified. Of these, PID 
numbers have been allotted to 5,851 properties. The process 
of allotting PID numbers for the remaining 968 properties is 
currently in progress .  
82. All BBMP properties that have been notified in the Karnataka 
Gazette have already been uploaded to the BBMP website 
(www. bbmp.gov.in).  
83. The Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike  (Estate 
Management) Rules 2024 has been approved by the 
government and has come into force from 01.01.2025. These 
rules enable the BBMP to lease out or to renew the existing 
BBMP  leased properties by fixing lease amount based on 
guidance value. Therefore, the pending 143 cases for renewal 
will be acted upon under these rules  and thereby more 
revenue is expected.  
84. Under Section 136 (4) of the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara 
Palike Act - 2020 , the survey of existing 6819 BBMP 
properties using ROVERS  has begun and so far, 60% of BBMP 
properties of Raja Rajeshwari  Nagar zone have been 
surveyed.  
85. For surveying of 20 lakhs private properties and 6819 BBMP 
properties, a  separate Survey Wing co nsisting of 209 
personnel, has been approved vide GO UDD 240 MNU 2024 , 
dated 07.12.2024 . In this aspect, the new survey wing 
 
BRUHAT BENGALURU MAHANAGARA PALIKE PERFORMANCE REPORT OF 2024 -25 
 
Page | 41  
 consisting of 16 officers & staff has started functioning under 
2 DDLR s (Deputy Directors of Land Records).  
86. The digitization and sc anning of 228 property registers has 
been taken  up. 
 
Road Infrastructure  
 
 
87. The State Government has approved an action plan for the 
“Sancharyukta Bengaluru”  works at the cost of Rs.200 
crores, and tenders have been invited for works worth Rs.47 
crores. An estimate has been prepared for the remaining 
works worth Rs.53 crores, and the said road works  will be 
executed after acquisition of  land which belong s to the 
Defense  Department  and hence i t is expected to spend Rs.25 
crore s during the year 2024 -25.  
88. Rs.50 crores have been provided for the widening of RMP 
roads under Brand Bengaluru -Sugama Sanchar Bengaluru, 
out of which action plans have been prepared for 08 works, 
preliminary land acquisition maps for the said project are 
being prepared, and it is expected that Rs.10 crores will be 
spent in the year 2024 -25. 
89. Rs.50 crores have been provided for the construction of RMP 
road under Brand Bengaluru - Sugama Sanchar Bengaluru . 
It is expected that Rs.50  crores  will be utilized in the year 
2024 -25. 
90. Under Brand Bengaluru - Sugama Sanchar Bengaluru, for 
Bengaluru  Urban Tunnel Project being the part of Bengaluru  
Urban Integrated Mobility Project, Rs.200  crores  have been 
allocated . An action plan has been approved for the said 
amount and it is expected that Rs.50 crores  will be utilized.  
91. Tenders have been invited for the development of 
Padaray anapura road under S ugama  Sanchara  Bengaluru 
and the tender process is underway.  
92. Rs.100 cr ores have been provided for K -RIDe (Karn ataka Rail 
Infrastructure Development Company)  under Brand 
Bengaluru  - Sugama Sanchar Bengaluru  and Rs.50 crores 
 
BRUHAT BENGALURU MAHANAGARA PALIKE PERFORMANCE REPORT OF 2024 -25 
 
Page | 42  
 will be  deposited  to K -Ride. The said Rs.50 crores are 
expected to be spent in the current year 2024 -25. 
93. Rs.50 crores have been provided for the transport -oriented 
development project in Banashankari Circle under Brand 
Bengaluru  - Sugama Sanchar Bengaluru . The work is bei ng 
carried out by BMRCL  and there is a proposal for depositing  
Rs.50 crores to the said organization, which is expected to be 
spent in the current year 2024 -25. 
94. Rs.47.85 crores have been provided under  the head repairs 
and maintenance  of arterial and sub -arterial roads in the 
year 2024 -25. However, the said amount of Rs.47 crores has 
been realigned to the bills of works carried out in 2023 -24.  
Out of total re -appropriation of Rs.791.85 crores including 
Rs.745 crores of re -appropriation from various heads,  
Rs.150 crores are expected to be spent in the year 2024 -25. 
95. Rs.25 crores have been provided for repair and maintenance 
of roads, footpaths, surface drains, flyovers, bridges and 
tunnels and out  of this, Rs.20 crores are expected to be 
utilized . 
96. The Gov ernment  has approved action plan for construction of 
white t opping at a cost of Rs.900 crores and Rs.100 crores 
for black topping  and Rs.300 crores is earmarked  in this 
regard . Out of this, an amount of Rs.100 crores will be spent . 
Storm Water D rain  
 
97. Rs.30 crores have been provided in the year 2024 -25 for 
Repair and Maintenance of Storm water Drains and Rs.8.60 
crores have been re -appropriated  to this head of account , 
making a total of Rs.38.60 crores.  An amount of Rs.30 crores 
will be spent during 202 4-25. 
98. Under the head ‘Repairs and maintenance – Other 
Maintenance’, a n action plan for Rs.20  crores have been 
approved for flood mitigation and disaster management in  
2024-25. Rs.10 crores  are expected  to be spent during this 
year. 
 
BRUHAT BENGALURU MAHANAGARA PALIKE PERFORMANCE REPORT OF 2024 -25 
 
Page | 43  
 Vibrant B engaluru   
 
99. Rs.100 crores have been allocated in the FY 2024 -25 for 
Vibrant Bengaluru theme under Brand Bengaluru Campaign 
for Decorative Electrification Project  and an action plan has 
been prepared for Rs.50 crores. Further an amount of Rs.25 
crores was kept for junction improvement and beautification 
of public  places  and tender is submitted for approval .  
 
Finance  
 
100.  The Annual accounts of 2023 -24 have been prepared by 
certified Charted Accountant. As announced earlier, during 
the next financial  year Accounting  and Budgeting Cell (ABC) 
will be created  which will be  headed by a qualified Chartered 
Accountant. It will look after the daily accounts,  preparation 
of the budget, manage ment of  tax related statutory matt ers 
and advise on other financial and accounting  reform s. 
 
**********  
 
 
 
===== END FILE: atr-english-final.pdf =====

===== START FILE: bbmp-restructuring-fullreport.pdf =====
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
     Chapter  Content   Page No  
   Foreword                      …………………..…..…….………………………………………….. ………..……. ..…….  i - iii  
1   Executive Summary   …………………..…..…….………………………………………….. ………..……. ..……. 1 
  
Committee Analysis and Recommendations 
2 Bengaluru: Karnataka's prime urban centre  ………… ……………..…..…  32 
3 Multiple Corporations: Experiences  ………… ……………..…..….  42 
 4  The 3 Tier Structure   …………………..…..…….………………………………………….. ………..……. ..…….  65 
 5  Activity Mapping  …………………..…..…….………………………………………….. ………..……. ..…….  121  
 6  Human Resources Management ………………… .…..…..…. 127 
 7  Financial Management  …………………..…..…….………………………………………….. ………..…… ..……. 161  
 8  Strategic & Spatial Planning Framework  ………… …………..…. ..…. 186 
 
Appendix  
 I Objectives and Guiding Principles  ………… …………..…. ..…. A-1 
 II Government Order  …………………..…..…….………………………………………….. ………..……. ..…….  A-4 
 I II  Activity Mapping Table  …………………..…..…….………………………………………….. ………..……. ..…….  A-7 
 IV GIS M aps …………………..…..…….………………………………………….. ………..……. ..…….  A-53 
 V  Useful R eferences   …………………..…..…….………………………………………….. ………..……. ..…….  A-105 
 VI  Acknowledgements  …………………..…..…….………………………………………….. ………..……. ..…….  A-109 
 
 
FOREWORD  
Page :iFOREWORD  
 
There was a time not so long ago, when Bengaluru with abundance of greenery was truly the 
‘Garden City’. But today ’Bangalored ’ has become a byword around the world, synonymous with 
‘cutting edge’ idea power, thanks to the brilliant crop of young minds’ springing out at every nook 
and corner of the State who have made Bengaluru a software capital of the world. However, along the way it has unfortunately lost its character too. The metropolitan city in the last decade 
registered the highest growth rate of 44.6%.  Unplanned growth has led to huge infrastructure deficiencies, coupled with poor urban service. Bengaluru’s urban management has come under severe criticism from one and all. There are no quick solutions as the city has over grown in size 
and shape. Despite this, we owe to the young brave hearts and the future generations that 
Bengaluru lives up to its reputation. For  this we have a long way to go. But attempt and achieve 
we must.  
Mindful of this , the Govt. of Karnataka under the visionary  leadership of our Chief Minister , Shri 
Siddaramaiah, invited me to chair the 3 -Member  Expert Committee of Shri Siddaiah, IAS (Retd.) 
and S hri V. Ravichandar to lay out a road map  in pursuit of that dream. We are indeed hono ured 
to be  charged with this noble task.  
The Committee over the last 8 months met over 1 ,000 stakeholders representing democratically 
elected representatives, political parties, officials, members of civil society and citizens’ forum. The 
Committee also studied in great detail various city gov ernance structures, across the w orld, took 
into consideration suggestions of several leading urban experts as well as reports of expert groups constituted for similar purpose.  The details are set out in our web site 
www.bbmprestructuring.org .  The Committee before addressing the solutions  had to understand  
the current status of the Mu nicipal Corporation ( BBMP ), be it be the organizational structure, 
finances, human resources, delegation of powers, role responsibilities of Council, zonal offices and 
wards, etc. T he Committee sought the services of e minent institutions such as Azi m Premj i 
University, WRI India , IISc, IIM -B, IIHS, ISEC, Janaagraha and other expert bodies. These institutions 
put in place research teams of experts to compile information , submit best practices and 
solutions. The committee is, therefore, beholden for their very valuable input s in the preparation 
of this report.  
 
FOREWORD  
Page :iiThe difficult task of recommending an appropriate structure for the governance for BBMP coul d 
only be possible if urban experts we re available full time to undertake the task. We were fortunate 
to have among o ur committee two eminently qualified members in  the team . Shri. Siddaiah, I.A.S, 
(Retd.), with whom I shared some of the glorious years of my service, is  a person of invaluable 
experience and knowledge on BBMP  having served as the Commissioner on tw o occasions. His 
contribution to the report especially in delineating the jurisdiction of the five corporations is 
invaluable where he has kept the emotional aspects and sentiments of B engalureans while 
suggesting the final configuration. He particularly brought in deep insights on improving citizen 
participation through ward committees, improving revenues through better property tax 
administration and delineating the HR set up for our proposed structure. Another member, Shri V. 
Ravichand ar has  in the past 15 years worked very closely on urban issues and contributed in 
bringing in innovative tax reforms within the BBMP . He brought in domain knowledge on urban 
management and global city governance structure s, to facilitate in finalising the report. He worked 
like a ‘One -man Army’ for the last 8 months.  I, therefore, wish to place on record their total 
contribution to this report.  
The Committee would also like to place on record its appreciation for the inputs received from 
several heads of the Government Depar tments and the heads of the Paras tatal agencies for their 
forthright observations, suggestions and inputs. The Committee also expresses its deep appreciation to two of its officers who served the Committee as Secretaries during the period, Shri Manivannan P, I.A.S,  and Shri V. Yashvanth , I.A.S . Similarly the Committee expresses deep sense of 
gratitude to Dr. Puttaswamy who in a record time of few days was able to complete translation of the report into Kannada compendium. There are others too who helped in finalizing the report 
whom we acknowledge with appreciation. The ir names figure in the Appendix to the report.  
The report establishes a need for urgent structural changes in Bengaluru Metropolitan Area 
(BMA). The Commit tee has taken a 25 -year horizon in making  its recommendations considering 
the present population figure at 10 million going up to 20 million by 2040. Recent experiences 
worldwi de indicate a move towards City -Region governance.  The Committee  after considerable 
deliberations  came to the conclu sion that a 3 -tier structure of governance for BMA would be an 
ideal architecture which will address the needs of the city and its citizens. Our report suggests an apex body at the Tier -1 – the Greater Bangalore Authority/Council with the functions of Loca l 
Planning Authority, infrastructure development, integration of parastatal agencies, economic 
FOREWORD  
Page :iiidevelopment, etc.  At the second tier, the Committee has proposed five Municipal corporations. 
Karnataka State was a pioneer in initiating devolution of powers un der the Panchayat Raj.  The 
Committee believes that similar devolution of powers should be provided at the ward level where 
the voice and aspirations of the citizens provides the spirit of the 3rd tier.  
While recommending the above structure of governance, the Committee kept in mind deep sentiments expressed by large sections of the society that ‘Brand Bengaluru’ should not lose its identity. The Committee by recommending Greater Bangalore Authority has ensured Bengaluru remains as one city governance just  the way London is today.  
We are privileged to have been called upon to propose a plan for  the future of this great city. 
Admittedly we have dreamt  big, but our beautiful city  deserves nothing less. We are firmly 
convinced that the recommendations made ar e eminently achievable given the combined forces 
at the command of the State.  
The Committee expresses its deep gratitude to the Hon’ble Chief Minister Shri Siddaramaiah and the Members of his Cabinet for giving us this unique responsibility to present our recommendations for a better future for all  Bengalureans.  
We, the 3 -member Committee, take great satisfaction in submitting its report on ‘BBMP 
Restructuring’ to the Govt. of Karnataka for consideration and acceptance.  
 
 B.S. Patil, I.A.S (Retd)  
Chairman  
 We would additionally like to place on record our deep appreciation of the leadership, wise 
counsel and sage advice that our Chairman, Mr. B.S. Patil provided through the entire BBMP 
Restructuring exercise. In keeping with his known penchant for being a to ugh task master 
throughout his service years, he kept us on track to meet the overall goals of this exercise!  
   Siddaiah, I.A.S (Retd)       V. Ravichandar   
  
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 1 1 EXECUTIVE  SUMMARY:  BBMP  RESTRUCTURING   
1.1 WHY  RESTRUCTURING?   
 
The Expert Committee was initially constituted to suggest how the existing Bruhat Bengaluru 
Mahanagar Palike (BBMP) could be divided into smaller municipal areas. In the view of the 
Government of Karnataka (GoK), Bengaluru had grown too large and unwieldy to be managed by a single Corporation. The 2007 amalgamation of the erstwhile Bangalore Mahanagar Palike (BM P) with 
7 City Municipal Councils (CMC), 1 Town Municipal Council (TMC) and 110 villages had not yielded the expected gains. For instance, the villages added to BBMP still languish without basic amenities like underground sewerage, drainage and piped water. 
The Committee discussed with the GoK about the proposed mandate suggesting division.  There 
were discussions whether the citizens multiple woes on the deteriorating quality of life could be 
addressed by wielding the scalpel and creating miniature version s of BBMP. It was felt there were 
serious challenges with multiple civic agencies operating in silos a nd a BBMP  set up that lacked 
appropriate governance, administration and people capacity. GoK agreed that unless one took a holistic view of what ails the current set up (BBMP, O ther civic agencies) in delivering on  citizen 
expectations, arriving at the contours of a comprehensive solution was infeasible. Hence the  case 
made by the Committee for a larger mandate that focussed on improving quality of life for all citizens 
(particularly the underprivileged) in Bengaluru th rough (i) Access to quality infrastructure and  
services and (ii) Accountability of s ervice providers , was accepted by GoK and the mandate of the 
Expert Committee was upgraded  accordingly . 
The Committee met wi th over 1,000 Stakeholders (E lected representatives, Senior officials of  
government agencies, Institutional groups, Resident Welfare Associations  (RWA), NGOs,  Community 
Based Organisations, etc.). A web site, www.bbmprestructuring.org , was set up as a two way 
communication platform between C itizens and the Expert Committee. The Committee reviewed best 
practices (Domestic / International), heard citizen suggest ions, set up teams for spatial databases, 
public finance , HR, governance / administration, activity mapping, legal & planning aspects  and held  
multi ple deliberations . This report is the culmination of these effort s and done with the su pport of 
many institutions and individuals.  
1.1.1  Infirmities in the current system  
Discussions and analysis of available data indicate a tale of multiple deficits that plague BBMP 
currently:  
•Ineffective  Governan ce and Administration  
oOverriding influence  of the State over Bengaluru manifested through a weak, one year 
‘titular’ mayor system, administrative measures and financial control through the grants 
process
oNegligible citizen participation  at the third tier of city governance  
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 2 oThe existence of silo ‘parastatals’ like BWSSB, BESCOM, BDA, BMTC that operate outside 
the control of the city leadership leading to serious coordination challenges  
oLarge Corporation Council with over 26 0 members ; limited deliberations about local 
development issues  
oOmnibus, in effective Standing Committees in BBMP with around 132 Councillors  across 
12 Committees  
oInsufficient independent powers  with Zonal Commissioners . 
 
•Citizens do not have a voice in the current system  
oThe 74th Constitutional Amendment mandates citizen particip ation through the vehicle 
of ward committees but this is routinely breach ed 
oThere is a citizen participation law on paper but giving veto power to the Councillor  
effectively negates any voice for the citiz ens 
oFarcical Ward Committee arrangements with poorly defined roles and responsibilities, member composition, meetings that are rarely held, etc.  
oDemands for ‘speed money’ for commonly required civic services.  
 
•Trust deficit  
oLeakages in civic works;  inflated contract values are considered the norm and f inancial  
indiscipline is the norm  at BBMP  
oThis coupled with poor state of infrastructure and service delivery has led citizens to distrust BBMP – for example , low revenue realisations (property tax payers < 50%) . 
 
•Lack of Accountability  
oNo one  seems responsible for t he state of the city , be it something as serious as citizens  
washed away in drains or pot holed roads, delaye d projects, mounting garbage, lack of 
walkable footpaths, building violations, encroachments, etc.  
oThe presence of multiple agencies lead s to a bla me game  – the road cutting and non-
restoration in time is a classical manifestation of this problem  
oNegligible mapping of activities across civic agencies with clear cut delineation of responsibilities of elected representatives and officials . 
 
•Poor state of Human resources  
oThe C&R (Cadre & Recruitment) Rule s, 1971 that govern BBMP is obsolete and not in 
tune with the times  
oIn-house employees lack urban expertise and have no training   
oExternal resources deputed at senior levels too have limited capabilities . They have no 
long term commitment to BBMP and hence are detrimental to developing a healthy 
internal culture    
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 3 oCity management needs urban professional resourc es with high domain knowledge. This 
is a huge  vacuum across civic agencies  
oNegligi ble specific job oriented training. No induction program  
oStaff shortage (about 35% vis -à-vis sanctioned capacity) . 
 
•Lack of Transparency  
oThe operations and finances  are shrouded in secrecy . There is n o visi bility on where the 
money is spent. There is no MI S system in place  and senior officers are severely 
handicapped in taking decisions . A Fund Based Accounting System implemented in 2003 
which had these features was circumvented and allowed to lapse  
oThere is no appetite for proactive disclosure, be it about  projects underway or how the 
money was spent 
oMore shockingly, the Central Accounts Office of BBMP was not part of the limited 
functionality , computerised accounting system in place at the Zonal level. So with no 
financial audit for over four years and poo r intern al records, it is near impossible to know 
the true state of affairs at the Co rporation . 
 
•Financial Mismanagement  
oBBMP which currently has own revenue sources of around Rs . 1800 crores annually 
(including arrears), had pending bills as of Apr 1, 2015 of Rs. 2,300 crores, a loan of around Rs. 2,200 crores and Spill over works of Rs. 3,000 crores indicative of serious 
financial stress   
oIn 2014- 15 less  than 50% of the estimated 23  lakh properties paid property tax indicative 
of a lax approach to wards  revenue mobilisation. Further, property tax rates that are 
based on land guidance value have not been revised since 2007    
oInterest in mopping up revenue from other promising sources like leased assets and advertising hoardings has been negligible allowing operators to flourish at the expense of the Corporation . 
 
•Planning deficiencies  for the Local Planning Area  
oThe Comprehensive Development Plan (CDP) exercise which is expected to determine the future of the city, produces static land use maps and regulations that are obsolete 
when compared to the needs and changing pace  of the city  
oCoordination and cooperat ion between the planning and implementing agencies is 
dismal  
oThe lack of town planning professionals is a serious impediment to planning, 
coordination and management of the city coupled with an inability to come up with 
proactive and innovative solutions  for the city’s myriad problems  
oReactive approach to  haphazard urban developments on the outskirts of the BBMP area .  
 
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 4 •Implementation challenges  
oNegligible prior planning, poor process / financial discipline and low people capacity 
manifests itself in extremely poor project execution on the ground in terms of final utility 
and time taken  
oProject pre -audits are often by -passed and consequently Return on Investments  are 
impossible to measure  
oInter -agency coordination is a major challenge due to lack of appropriate integration 
platforms and multiplicity of authorities. Road cutting woes faced by citizens is a glaring example of this failure  
oPoor control on expenditure and limited use of third party inspection resulting in runaway costs with poor outcomes  
oPoor enforcement  and blatant violations of the law of the  land leading to  unfavourable 
outcomes  – visible examples in land use / building plan violations, land title disputes, 
encroachment of lakes / government properties, unaccounted for water (50%) , riding on 
footpaths, jumping traffic signals, etc.  
oThe garbage problem in Bengaluru has now been festering for over three years without a 
positive resolution.   
 
1.1.2 Addressing the infirmities  
 
The Expert Committee on BBMP Restructuring focussed on finding systemic remedies to the 
existing infirmities that is holding Bengaluru back from realising its true potential as the best city in India  and one of the truly liveable global cities in the world. Beyond making the city a more liveable 
one, it needs to be an engine of economic growth creating livelihoods and attracting investments. 
This will call for political will and administrative support in realising the holistic vision of what 
Bengaluru can become and getting there.  
The subsequent sections in this summary analyses options and sets out the Committee’s 
recommendations.  
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 5 
1.2 THE  SUGGESTED  ARCHITECTURE  FOR  MANAGING  BENGALURU:  RATIONALE  
 
Fig 1 a: The 3 Tier Governance frame work  
The Committee recommends a holistic structure for managing B engaluru which is guided by the 
following philosophies:
•Recommendations to be rooted in constitutional principles with a focus on the 74th CAA 
oProviding for the Metropolitan Planning Committee (MPC) at the Regional level with 
the Greater Bengaluru Authority (GBA) as a Local Planning Authority (LPA)  
oStrengthening the ward committees at the lowest level . 
•Giving voice and a place for citiz ens at the ‘table’ to address  local urban issues in their 
neighbourhood  
oA representative Ward committee with clearly defined functions  
oWard s empowered to take necessary action to fix issues faced by the locality . 
•Political Devolution and Decentralised Accountability  
oSubsidiarity principle wherein any activity is undertaken at the level where it is best 
placed to deliver – Ward, Zone, Corporation and Greater Bengaluru Authority  
oPowers accordingly devolved to smaller governance units with a credible leader at the Municipal Corporation level. 
•Co-existence of larger Metropolitan governance structures while protecting the devolved 
powers at the lower levels  
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 6 
oFor visioning, strategic planning, integration, coordination, economic development   
oTo p rotect and reinforce brand Bengaluru . 
•‘Watch dog’ me chanisms as custodians of citizens ’ interests  
oFor fair and equitable distribution of resources and problem resolution , a Greater 
Bengaluru Finance  Commission  
oA Greater Bengaluru Services  Ombudsman for citizens to make their case for better 
civic services f rom the agencies rather than approaching the Courts  
oEnsuring a transition path for village areas as their character changes to 
predominantly urban, through a Municipalisation Committee housed in the BDA 
within the Greater Bengaluru Authority . 
Arising from the above (Fig 1 a), we have suggested a 3 tier governance framework for Bengaluru 
[Ward, Municipal Corporation, Greater Bengaluru Authority (GBA)]  with the footprint of the current 
Bengaluru Metropolitan Area of 1,307 sq kms  and the M PC with BMRDA footprint of 8,005  sq kms.  
1.3 WARD  DELIMITATION  IMPERATIVE  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
F 
 
 
 
Fig 1 b: Ward Population as per Census 2011  
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 7 The existing 1 98 wards in the BBMP area of 709.5 sq kms  formed during the amalgamation of 2007 
were based on the 2001 census. During the decade 2001 -11, Bangalore grew by 44.6%, the highest 
in its comparable class in the world. If we view Bengaluru today it has an inner core (within Outer 
Ring Road) and outer periphery with equal po pulation of about 50 lakhs each. During 2001 -11 the 
inner core grew by about 18%, the outer periphery grew by over 100%. This has resulted in grossly  
mismatched wards . 21 wards have a 2011 population of < 30,000 while 43 wards have a  population 
> 50,000. The largest ward Horamavu (95,368  in 2011) is well over 1.1  lakhs currently.  
While the current 198 wards need a delimitation exercise to rationalise their sizes , it was felt that 
an ideal ward size needs to be around 25,000 improving  scope for a more  decentralised 
administration. It is noted that areas in the core of the old city are a are growing slowly (or even 
losing population) while the periphery is growing rapidly. Consequently the ward population  could 
be fixed at 20,000 (growth  areas) - 30,000 (core areas) to allow for a balance to be developed over 
the next decade  at which time the delimitation could be again revisited. For the current population 
of around 10 m illion, the Committee suggests about 400 wards to be delineated in t he current 
BBMP area.  The Committee is of the opinion that ward delimitation (exact number to be 
determined) is a necessary prerequisite for the restructuring.  
1.4 STRENGTHENING  WARD  GOVERNANCE  AND  ADMINISTRATION  
Any fix to our city structures need to start at the lowest level of interface between the citizen and the 
elected Councillor / Administration system. Consultations with citizen groups have revealed a huge 
trust deficit between citizens and government, manifest in an extremely dysfunctional ward committee arrangement – the composition of the ward committee is flawed, its functions are not 
clear and the Councillor has veto powers on any decisions taken there. Meetings are not held in many cases, and most Councillors ignore the Ward committee on the grou nds that they are elected 
by the citizens and themselves sufficiently represent the will of the people. The Committee recommends a set of reforms for the Ward Committee and operations at the Ward level that is 
rooted in the spirit of the 74
th Constitutiona l Amendment mandating ward committees.  
1.4.1  Ward Committee Composition   
 
Fig 1 c: The Ward Committee Composition  

                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 8 We have provided for a Ward Committee with wider representation of political parties through 
proportional representation and also provide for more members nominated from civil society. A 20 
member Ward Committee chaired by the Ward Councillor has been suggested  (Fig 1c ): 
•10 in the  Elected category  (through proportional representation)  
oEvery competing Councillor would indicate at least 3  nominees for the Ward Committee 
at the time of filing the nomination  
oEvery 10% vote share for a candidate results in a seat in the Ward Committee under the 
Elected category  
The unfilled seats (out of 10) through this allocation process can be filled by th e 
winning Councillor as per their choice  
oThis will make the e lected group representative of the voting preferences of the ward. 
 
•10 in the  Nominated category  
o5 diverse civil society groups with suggested representati on 
oThere will be a process of selection from the applicants based on appropriate criteria 
managed by a  Selection Committee . 
1.4.2  Ward  Committee Functions  
Currently there are no clear definitions on the roles and responsibilities of the Ward Committee. This has been addressed:  
•The Ward Committee  will be entrusted with more powers to ensure that most civic issues in the 
ward can be addressed at the ward level itself  
•Provide inputs for annual and 5 year plans for the ward   
•Provide desired ward budget estimates as an input to the Municipal Corporat ion for the budget 
finalisation exercise  
•Supervisory and audit powers. This is expected to address the key problems on the ground 
related to quality, completeness of works undertaken and the financial leakages in civic projects  
•Communicate to the citizens of the ward about projects and the decisions taken.  
1.4.3  Financial devolution to the ward  
Currently Wards are given either Rs. 2 crores  or Rs. 3 crores annually as a w ard budget. This has no 
scientific basis. Further, the one area where the w ard Councillor (with assistance from the Ward 
Committee and citizenry) can be in control  of their revenue resources is p roperty tax collections. It 
is necessary  to find a fair basis for allocation . It is also desirable to incentivise the ward to enhance 
their property tax collection through the following measures:  
•The Proposed Greater Bengaluru Finance  Commission should set out a basis for financial 
devolution to the ward on fair, equitable principles  
•Wards that have historical infrastructure deficiencies would  need additional intervention 
through the proposed GBA  
•A proportion of the  property tax collected by the w ard subject to a minimum amount should 
devolve t o the ward for financing their w ard plans at the discretion of the Ward Committee. 
This will go a long  way to ensure higher property tax complianc e.   
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 9 
1.4.4  Aligning Service agency jurisdictions to wards  
One of the key expectations of citizens is to have  BBMP and other civic service providers align their 
activities at the ward level. This is a considerable  challenge given the varying jurisdictions and the 
specific internal organisation structures of organisations like BWSSB, BESCOM, Police, BMTC, etc. It 
is unreasonable to expect them to reorganise themselves w ard wise given the operation logistics, 
infrast ructu re and costs involved. Further wards get delimited from time to time and repeated 
reorganisation will be a challenge . However, one needs to find a way to have them align their 
activities at the ward level.   
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
Fig 1d: Varying j urisdictions  of some ‘parastatal ’ agencies  
We have some suggestions to help align parastatals to citizens at the ward level:  
•Each of the parastatal agencies should have a designated ward ‘Single Point Of Contact’ (SPOC) 
officer who is well versed with the agencies organisation structure, jurisdiction, processes and activities. These SPOCs should be capable of resolving any citizen query or requests related to their agency . Based on the internal organisation of the parastatals, an individual will be a SPOC 
for multip le wards  
•A virtual ‘avataa r’ of these SPOCs could be mirrored online where most of the typical citizen 
queries can be addressed without the need for human intervention  
•Coordinati on between multiple government parastatal  agencies - The integration of parastatals 
like BWSSB, BESCOM, Police (Law & Order, Traffic), BMTC for a ward will be achieved through a monthly coordination meeting at the zonal  level . 
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 10 1.5 SETTING  OUT  THE  MUNICIPAL  CORPORATION  LAYER   
The current single BBMP model is unsustainable. The system is not effective currently, and with a 
likely population of over 20 million by 2040, steep deterioration in the quality of living can be 
expected to set in rapidly. It has been near impossible for a single BBMP Commissioner to 
effectively administer such a wi de populace spread over a large geographic area. Further growth 
will only make this challenge harder.  
For effective governance, the devolution of powers from large, centralized governmental bodies to 
smaller, decentralized units are necessary. Devolution includes both political and administrative 
decentralization whereby decision -making powers are handed over from higher levels of the 
government to lower levels. Considering the principle of subsidiarity, the Municipal Corporations 
must be made directly res ponsible for only those issues that cannot be solved at lower levels.  
1.5.1  The debate about One vs. Multiple Corporations  
There have been considerable discussions with Stakeholders and in the media whether we need 
Multiple Corporations at the proposed se cond tier of our 3 tier governance framework. The 
proponents of the single Corporation as a ‘command and control’ centre with  empowered Zonal 
units (8 Zones as exists in BBMP currently) believe that a hard dose of administration is all that is necessary to  make the place liveable. However, the experience of a single Corporation from 2007 to 
2015 has been otherwise  – many of the infirmities (unwieldy size, poor governance and 
administration, limited voice for citizens, low revenue generation, financial mismanagement, etc.) 
have been set out earlier. One of the key objectives of amalgamation was to provide infrastructure 
in outlying areas. This has not happened. Wards in the outer areas (and currently nearly half of 
Bengaluru lives there) have suffered in terms of infrastructure with many areas having less than 
50% underground drainage and piped water. Citizens in these areas have complained of neglect and 
apathy towards their problems and just getting prominent political leaders or high ranking officers to vis it the area is seen as a victory!  Most of them want a governance structure that is sensitive to 
their needs and closer to them.   
Then there is the historical experience from across the world. There is no city with Bengaluru’s 
populati on of 10 million and  709.5 sq kms area that operates as a single Corporation entity. Our 
research has shown the following:  
•Top mega -cities follow multi- municipal structures  
•Decentralization and devolution of powers is felt to be useful as cities grow  
•Finding optimal scale and  size of governance is an iterative process  
•The number of Corporations is based on balancing power, economy & accountability  
•Clarity in roles and responsibilities between local, metropolitan and regional levels is 
necessary  
•The case for political and administrative decentralization is quite strong across the world.  
Finally, it is worthwhile pondering on the growth of Bengaluru from 2001 and the likely scenario over the next 25 years till 2040. The grow th apart from being rapid (Fig 1e ) has taken place beyond 
the Outer Ring Road and this trend will sustain over the years.  
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 11 In 2015, the population within the Outer Ring Road (ORR) and outside it within BBMP is about the 
same. This will increase in the coming years in favour of the Outer areas. We need to proactively 
consider multiple Corporations to manage the  growth in the area. Continuing  with the current 261 
member single BBMP  mode l, would only imply adopting an ostrich policy to a potential problem.     
 
Fig 1e: Bengaluru’s growth 2001- 2041 (estimated)  
 
1.5.2  Multiple Municipal Corporations  
It is clear t hat we need multiple Municipal C orporations. But what is the correct number of new 
Corporations? One guide in deciding an ideal size is to think of the span of control that can be effectively managed over the long term (from now to 2040) in terms of population and area. It is 
also important to take care to ensure that the Municipal Corporations are more or less balanced in terms of their financial viability and future growth potential of both the economic base and the 
population.  
The Committee made multiple iterations trying out combinations of 3, 4, 5, 6 and 8 Municipal Corporations. T hough 3 was okay in the short term it did not scale too well over the long term – the 
area covered and population were too large currently  to absorb future growth. 8 Corporations were 
too many and getting ‘balance’ among so many units was also a challenge. The best fit Corporation which ‘balanced’ the various areas and kept intact the essential character of Bengaluru was a 5 Corporation solution. This had the scope to scale well over the next twenty five years. The benefits of a 5 Corporation solution was expected in terms of significantly better revenue realisation due to greater focus on raising resource s and incentives for higher property tax collections. The garbage 
issue could be more effectively resolved over 5 Corporations with a focus on segregation at source 
and decentralised processing by waste streams. 5 Commissioners and 10 Zonal Commissioners overseeing the administration in their designated areas would be a lot more effective than the 
current set up.  It would also make for healthy competitive spirit between the 5 entities.  

                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 12 
The proposed 5 Corporation solution is set out in Fi g 1f. The 2014 Population (#), Decadal Growth 
rate (DGR) 2001 -11 (%), Area (sq kms) and 2014 -15 Property tax (Rs. crores including arrears) is set 
out against each of the 5 Corporations. The property tax potential is expected to be around twice  
the figure indicated.  We  have es timated the infrastructure availability  for these 5 Corporation 
areas ( Chapter 3 and Appendix  IV) – this can be used to decide on investment decisions to raise the 
infrastructure q uotient in the under developed w ards. Finally, this map is indicativ e – the actual 
boundaries  need to be drawn after the w ard delimitation exercise is completed. It is advisable at 
that stage to align the Corporation boundaries to the key arterial or main roads wherever possible.   
 
Fig 1f : The Suggested 5 Municipal Corpo rations  
Historical connection : The 5 Corporation  model epitomises a Bengaluru aligned to its historical 
roots  while reaching out to seek its tryst with the modern world. Corporation 1 is in the Yelahanka 
area, where Bengaluru’s founder Kempegowda first set up base. Kempegowda II moved base to 
Bengaluru and the 4 pillars he erected to represent the boundaries of Bengaluru in the sixteenth 
century. The four Corporations (2 -5) have a portion of the city centre and share a pillar each , 
making a connection with a historical landmark . 
 
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 13 Key c haracteristics of the 5 Corporations  
 
Parameters  MC 1   MC 2  MC 3  MC 4  MC 5 
Direction North  Central  West  South  East
Population 2,011#  1139035  1948517  2182475  1583352  1590296  
Population decadal 
growth %  103 15 43 44 66 
Area (sq km)  150.5  71.1  157.2  118.7  211.6  
Population density 
2,011 #/(sq.km) 7,568  27,405  13,883  13,339  7,515  
Buildings 2,014#  206820  200833  309205  223589  256717  
HH Census 2,011 #  2,93,251  4,69,055  5,37,806  3,97,429  4,04,290  
Est Builtup area 2,014 
(sq m)  4.7 cr  6.1 cr  7.2 cr  6.9 cr  8.2 cr  
2,014 -15 Property tax 
(Rs. crores)  213.6  369.9  278.6  456.1  429.4  
Road length (kms)/Sq. 
Kms  16.7  25.4  23.7  19.7  14.7  
DWCC 2,014 #  20 51 56 37 32 
Open spaces/Area  %  4.85  2.63  2.53  4.9 5.48  
Police stations #  14 31 22 18 18 
Bus stops #  663 747 1,068  731 765 
2,011 HHs with UGD 
(%) 56.4  95.4  87.9  86.3  58.4  
2,011 HHs with Piped 
water supply (%)  45.7  88.1  79 72.5  58.5  
One of the arguments against splitting BBMP in the public debate has been the fear  of the loss of 
the Bengaluru brand. This implicitly assumes brand Bengaluru is dependent on BBMP remaining as a 
single unit forever. This is not the case. Brand Bengaluru is shaped by its people, its ethos, its 
culture, its vibrancy, its promise among a h ost of other factors. BBMP by no yardstick can be 
considered to be the sign post of brand Bengaluru and it is extremely unlikely that the Founder of 
Bengaluru visualised a future day BBMP as the flag bearer of the city. The recommendation  to make 
it into m ultiple units is driven by a desire to make the city more manageable and more liveable. 
London has 33 boroughs but it s brand is one of the best in the world – the former mayor Ken 
Livingstone had opined that ideally London should have been 5 super boroughs  for a stronger 
borough presence and better management of the area . Our recommendation for a Greater 
Bengaluru Authority will help build, sustain an d nurture brand Bengaluru.  
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 14 1.5.3  Municipal Corporation Composition  
Fig 1g: Municipal Corporation structure  
Our recommendations  for strengthening the Municipal Corporations have revolved around 
strengthening the Mayoral system and reimagining the institution of the Standing Committees and 
the Zonal arrangements:
•We propose a 5 year Mayoral term with the Mayor as the head of the Corporation with a 
Mayor’s council supported by the Municipal Commissioner in executing the role and responsibilities. The 1 year, titular, revolving mayor is detrimental to the management of the Corporation and should certainly be done a way with. The issue of Corporation 
leadership and management is too complex to think that it can be headed by a ceremonial, powerless head  
•On the issue of the selection of the Mayor, we are in favour of a directly elected Mayor at 
the time of the Corporation elections. There could be challenges in terms of managing the 
Council if the Mayor is from a different political party than the majority party or an Independent  candidate . This could be overcome by  the greater acceptability among the 
populace and will act as precursor to a later day direct ly elected Metropolitan Mayor of  the 
proposed Greater Bengaluru Authority  
•However, we realise that the alternative option of a Mayor in Council elected by the Corporation Councillors  has been considered by previous com mittees on urban 
management . This is in sync with practices in the rest of the country but less preferable 
than a directly elected mayor  
•We strongly advocate rationalising the number of Standing Committees to three, with their 
role focused on framing rule s and policies.  
1.5.4  Zonal  level arrangements  
Further, even in a multi Municipal Corporation set up, following the principles of devolution and 
decentralisation, we will need zones to manage a set of wards. We s uggest 2 z ones per Municipal 
Corporation each managing about 35 -40 wards in a 400 ward city. The Zonal Commissioners will be 
in charge of the zones to deliver on the decisions of the Municipal Corporation.  

                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 15 For the z one to be a legitimate unit of governance, it must bring together both political and 
administrative capacity. Hence, we propose regular monthly meetings  headed by a Zonal 
Comm issioner and consisting of all w ard councillors belonging to the zone.  
One of the important activities proposed at the zonal level is solid waste management. The current 
system of dumping municipal solid waste of a city of 10 million in villages with population of 500 -
1000 outside BBMP is mora lly and ethically wrong. N either is it sustainable as a long term practice. 
With segregation and decentralized handling, the  waste of a set of wards within a zone should be 
predominantly managed within its boundaries or at least within the relevant Municipal Corporation boundaries. And if there are constraints in doing so, they need to forge arrangements with other 
Corporations  to take their waste on commercial terms.  
Quarterly Zonal meetings  
Apart from  the monthly Zonal Committee meetings which the Zonal Commissioner convene s with the 
relevant Ward Councillors, every zone also needs to have a quarterly meeting with wider 
participation. The quarterly meeting should include, along  with the Councillors from the zone, all the 
Members of the Legislative Assembly whose constituency falls wholly or partly within the jurisdiction 
of the Zone . It should also include the zonal level heads of all the departments of the Municipal 
Corpor ation and representatives from p arastatal agenc ies who are designated for the z one.  
These  meetings would help resolve the issues faced by each Zone in a better manner due to the 
participation of represe ntatives from various levels of government. The advantage of having MLAs 
from the Zone participating in these meetings is that, they can take stock of the various issues faced 
by the constituents in the Zone and take it up at higher levels as required. Whi le MLAs are expected 
to play a role in the Legislature, the reality on the ground is that their constituents expect them to 
fix local civic issues too. These meetings will give them a handle on the state of civic affairs of their 
wards and a forum for them to provide their valuable inputs.  
1.5.5  Municipal Corporation and Zone functions  
The Municipal Corporation functions derive themselves from the Article 243 -W of the Twelfth 
Schedule of the Constitution. At the Corporation level, three Standing Committees coverin g subjects 
of Taxation / Finance, Budget / Account and Other subjects is suggested. We foresee most of the 
execution roles being undertaken at the Ward and Zone level with the Municipal Corporation as the 
policy making and deliberative body.  
The Co mmittee has also undertaken a detailed Activity level mapping of all civic functions and set 
out the level at which this is best carried out. One of the key activities across the board at the 
Municipal Corporation level is the dimension of ‘Service Level p romis e’ to the citizens  (eg. time 
taken for khata transfer or issuing a birth certificate) – the Municipal Corporation in most cases  will 
specify service levels that can be expected and put in place measures to deliver on the promise.  
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 16 1.6 GREATER  BENGALURU  AUTHORITY  (GBA)  AS THE  TOP  TIER 
The Tier 2 and Tier 3 arrangements will work only if we have a Greater Bengaluru layer (Tier 1) that 
integrates all the civic activities and takes responsibility for planning and administration of the 
Bengaluru metropolitan activities. One of the causes of Bengaluru’s current woes is the lack of 
attention and future planning for the extended region.  
The haphazard development and lack of infrastructure provisioning in the outlying areas has 
impacted the quality of life in Bengaluru adversely.  The apex body is strongly advocated on multiple 
counts:  
•Nearly all stakeholders consulted have voiced concerns about ensuring that the Bengaluru brand is protected, nurtured and further grown over time. The Greater Bengaluru Authority (GBA) will ensure that all activities in the metropolitan area will be in sync with building brand 
Bengaluru.  
•There are many civic requirements that are best executed on a larger scale (e.g. bus services, 
utilities provisioning, major road infras tructure, etc.). One of the complaints  of Bengaluru 
citizens is the lack of inter -agency coordination due to organisation silos which requires 
integration. The GBA arrangement will have place for the parastatals (eg. BWSSB, BESCOM, 
BMTC, etc.) and allow for both inter -agency and inter -municipal coordination  
•Our Comprehensive Development Plans (CDP) drawn every decade end up being no more than land use plans, and even these are poorly executed. The CDP sections involving mobility, energy, environmen t, water supply, sewer age, though  nicely written up, are not followed through in 
practice. By anchoring the Planning function in the GBA set -up as part of the Local Planning 
Authority (LPA) under the BMRDA region, the plans drawn up have a better chance of seeing the light of d ay and ensure compliance  
•Attracting investments and job creation is critical. An Economic Development Agency anchored at the GBA level and run as PPP has huge scope for Bengaluru to be at the forefront on city 
economy innovation in the country.  
1.6.1  Footp rint of the Greater Bengaluru Authority  
The footprint of the GBA is ideally the Bengaluru Metropolitan Area (BMA) also known as the BDA 
area currently. The Committee examined multiple options for the footprint of the GBA  (Fig 1h ) – 
these  included staying with BBMP 709 .5 sq kms (will not be sufficient even till 2025), BMA area, 
Bengaluru Urban District 2190 sq kms (has considerable non -urban settlements), following the 
growth corridors 1710 sq kms (a bit scattered - does not follow any exi sting district jurisdictions). 
On considering all the alternatives, t he BMA footprint (BBMP + BDA) of 1307 sq kms was considered 
most appropriate for GBA – it already is the declared  LPA under th e regional structure anchored 
under the  BMRDA.  
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 17 
          BBMP + BDA                       Bangalore Urban District            Bangalore Urban Growth 
Fig 1h: Alternatives for the GBA footprint  
 
1.6.2 Greater Bengaluru Authority (GBA) Composition  
 
Fig 1i: GBA Members  
It is suggested that the proposed Greater Bengaluru Authority be headed initially by the Chief 
Minister. Since the State has had a major role in the city for decades and there are multiple, 
complex legacy issues, it is suggested that the State continues to play a role in steering the new arrangement at the Metropolitan city level. Over time (within a 5 to 10 year period), as the system matures and the initial teething problems are resolved, Bengaluru should go in for a directly elected ‘Metropolitan Mayor’ for the Greater Bengaluru Authority There is currently no legal arrangement at the State level for managing a Metropolitan city. A new Bengaluru region Act will be needed to 
enable it.  
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 18 The following are the key constituents of the 34 member GBA:  
•Chairperson (subsequently Metro politan Mayor) and Metropolitan Commissioner  
•15 out of 400 representatives from the Municipal Corporation level through Mayors and 
Zonal representatives  
•5 out of  27 Bengaluru City MLAs who are members of the relevant Municipal Corporation  
•2 Zilla Parishad  representatives from the BDA area 
•5 Parastatals  
•5 Doma in experts about city issues   
•Permanent invitees like the Police , DULT, etc.  to help coordinate city wide activities.      
1.6.3  GBA Function 
The key functions that will be undertaken at the GBA level:  
•Plan and Plan enforcement
oPlanning functions will encompass Stra tegic Visioning for the City's unified f uture, 
close inter- linkages between land use plans, mobility, infrastructure,  economic 
development plans and detailing strategic projects  
oMunicipalisat ion Committee for orderly transition of rural to urban areas in BDA  
oEnforcement is critical because currently the Comprehensive Development Plans 
which are more in the  nature of land use plans , are not outcome oriented in terms of 
detailing out implementable projects and currently attempt s to check violations  
•Mega Infrastructure projects that span the city. Examples would be major arterial roads, 
storm water drains, flyovers, bus rapid transit systems, etc.  
•Parastatal integration is a key activity of the GBA. There is a need to align the functioning of 
these bodies in line with the requirements of the city in a ‘Principal -Client’ manner. While  
BDA and BWSSB can report to  the GBA, the other parastatal Corporation entities need to 
work in tandem with the ove rall goals of the GBA, Municipal Corporations  
•Inter Municipal Corporation coordination  
•Mobility plans and outcomes for the city including integrating the activities of the multiple mobility parastatals, the Municipal Corporations and the Traffic police  
•Economic Development. This is a new function and extremely critical since the trend in the 
developed world is a competition among cities to attract investments and create jobs to be 
an attractive destination. A few key points about Economic development:  
oEcono mic development is knowledge and skills -enhancing; it builds long -term assets 
that benefit everyone; it is not real -estate development  
oUrban economic development is much more than economic growth; and its engine is not land value, but skills and value -addi tion 
oBasic services can be a tremendous economic development opportunity  
oThe informal economy has high growth and development potential  
oEconomic development cannot depend on free give -aways, but show enhanced 
public benefit and long -term accounting  
oEconomi c development requires a specialized economic development agency which 
can be run as a public -private partnership .   
  
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 19 
1.7 OTHER  INSTITUTIONAL  ARRANGEMENTS  IN THE  ECOSYSTEM  
Fig 1k  sets out the composite proposed 3 tier governance framework along with the other 
Institutional elements. The three  institutions listed here are the Metropolitan Planning Committee 
(a 74th amendment requirement), Greater Bengaluru Finance  Commission (for f air and equitable 
distribution) and a Civic Services ombudsman (as custodian of citizens’ interests).   
 
 
Fig 1k : The proposed 3 Tier Governance framework with eco system institutions  
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 20 
1.7.1  Metropolitan Planning Committee (MPC)  
The MPC is a 74th Amendment mandatory requirement. In our view this should be at BMRDA 
regional level of 8,005  sq kms  (Fig 1l) : 
•Bengaluru needs a planning body that looks out for development activities on its outskirts and 
help accommodate that elsewhere to reduce the burden on the city  
•Land development in the region tends to happen before any government regulated expansion and he nce planning for the future requires a larger jurisdiction  
•The current metropolitan region houses several urban local bodies that are almost contiguous 
to Bengaluru  and needs a metropolitan regional authority for coordination, negotiation and 
cooperation purposes  
•Technically, the spirit of setting up the MPC is to coordinate plans of at least two or more Municipalities or Panchayats. The Development (Master) Plan despite splitting up of the BBMP 
should remain a single plan a s it is one city.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Fig 1l: BMRDA planning bodies (LPA)  
Currently the MPC has been notified for the BDA area. No meetings have been held and the issue of 
MPC composition and functioning is in Court. It is suggested that the MPC be notified as the BMRDA area and  the compositio n and functions of MPC  building on the suggestions of the Dr. Kasturirangan 
committee  are laid out in the report . The GBA would be a Local Planning Authority within the MPC.  
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 21 1.7.2  Municipalisation Committee  at GBA level  
There are about 25 villages in the BDA area (and some beyond) which exhibit urban characteristics. 
More villages will grow to become more urban and need to be brought under an urban road map. 
Some of the larger settlements could be designated as Nagar Panchayats and over time grouped 
together with the Municipal Corporations as their populations grow. The restructuring exercise should include  planned municipalisation of the portions of the GBA that are outside BBMP limits . In 
this area, there has been a significant rise in home construction, and many parts of this peri -urban 
region can no longer be governed through the panchayats in those areas. They end up being badly managed resulting in a later day pressure on Municipal Corporations when they are broug ht under 
their dispensation.   
In current law, the municipalisation of new areas is based on the assumption that villages gradually and organically grow into larger and larger settlements. Accordingly, at a certain threshold of 
population, they are designa ted as 'urban' areas, and from that time onwards they are governed 
accordingly, instead of under the rural framework.  While this assumption may once have held some 
meaning, it is clearly no longer valid. Throughout the country, the urban form today include s a mix 
of three demographic realities – the continuing densification of existing urban areas,  engulfed  rural 
and urban settlement in areas near the periphery of cities, and large new developments put up by 
private developers for thousands of new residents in apparently urban settings situated within the 
middle of panchayat areas. These settlements inhabit a no -man ’s-land of governance, being neither 
integrated into the panchayati raj system, nor established as new 'municipal' areas.  The BDA area is 
full o f such urban fragments (peri -urban growth, and townships in rural settings), which will need to 
be municipalised sooner or later. Indeed, BBMP itself is the result of the municipalisation and absorption of earlier villages which were outside the limits of the pre 2007  BMP.   
Cities are the prime platforms  for job opportunities and lifting people out of poverty . The key 
expectation of people is access to more efficient public services and infrastructure provision . Land 
speculation and haphazard urban growth patterns at peripheries scatter investments in expensive 
bulk infrastructure and dilutes the future potential of the city. While renewal and retrofitting of 
deteriorating core city areas is pertinent, so is planning for urban expansion  and a relevant 
municipalisation strategy .  
The previous Regional Structure Plan for Bangalore (up  to 2011) wrongly predicted that Bangalore – 
Mysore corridor and Nelamangala could attract  rapid urban growth absorbing 60% of Bangalore’s 
deflected population growth. This was expected to be made possible by modulating and containing 
development pressures in the eastern segment and attracting growth away from the city. The 
market trend was different ; the r evision of the Bangalore Master Plan (RMP 2015) and the Revised 
Structure Plan (BMR RSP 2031) indicate  a flurry of investment and  activity in the city’s eastern,  
south -eastern and northern segments.  
The way forward then is to have a more nimble  and dynamic strategy that assesses and manages 
trend s rather than try ing to fight it. At a broader regional level, this could be achieved by a ‘land 
capability analysis’ which indicates  zones more suitable to urbanisation and helps mandatorily 
conserve ecologically sensitive areas such as wetlands, valleys, drains and water bodies.  
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 22 At a municipal and GBA level, agencies  need to be more perceptive to trend and make shorter 
duration plans (5 year revision periods)  legally ensuring strategic plots  of land can be identified as 
sites for public space, infrastructure, transport, and then acquired before they are lost to 
development. To properly manage expansion, cities should balance expansion with added density 
and integrate regional and metropolitan  planning in a comprehensive vision for development. This 
can include analysis to better understand natural and ecological networks, economic geography, growth patterns, transit connectivity between settlements, and other relevant factors. Good examples of  managing urban expansion are Town Planning Schemes, new township and large 
development policies, public space policies , etc. Following such guidelines set out in new township 
location policies for example will ensure that islands of infrastructure excellence do not appear in the midst of arable, multi cropping agricultural land. The consequences of failing to plan for expansion are clear.  
It is proposed to set up a Municipalisation Committee  (within the BDA)  for the GBA region (that 
could be used as a model for other peri -urban regions in the State) that would address the issues of 
proactively planning for the orderly transition of predominantl y rural communities to an urban 
landscape in a timely manner.   
1.7.3  Greater Bengaluru Finance  Commission  
The need for a Greater Bengaluru Finance  Commission is evident for a 3 tier set up where decisions 
on fiscal flows need to be made in an objective, non -partisan manner. Decisions need to be made 
on the formula for flow of grants to the Multiple Municipal Corporations and the GBA based on assesse d needs across the 5 Municipal Corporations. Further, it is suggested that Wards be 
incentivised by allowing a proportion of the property tax collected to be retained for Ward projects. 
In the new system, the SFC allotted funds would devolve to the GBA whi ch would use the Greater 
Bengaluru Finance  Commission norms to do the further distribution. They would also set out 
proportion of own funds that can be retained by the Municipal Corporations. Some of the terms of 
reference for the proposed Greater Bengalur u Finance  Commission:  
•Suggestions on the distribution of financial resources between agencies under the GBA 
jurisdiction, and between those agencies and their underlying zones/wards    
•Recommend measures to augment financial resources of agencies in the GBA jurisdiction 
through both tax and non -tax revenues , including the GBA itself, its constituent 
municipalities and other parastatal agencies    
•Review the fina ncial position and financial  performance of the GBA and its constituents and 
make recommendations on measures to improve financial sustainability, including appropriate Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management mechanisms  
•Review standards for Public Expenditure Management proc esses and systems, comprising  
financial reporting standards, budgeting standards, performance measurement  and 
reporting standards, related data and information architecture and systems and standards 
pertaining to the same.   
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 23 1.7.4  Greater Bengaluru Services  Ombudsman  
 
It is suggested to have a Greater Bengaluru Services  Ombudsman to redress citizen grievances 
related to service delivery failure of civic agencies. The Ombudsman will differ from the Lok Ayukta 
in that s/he will concern himself only with service level complaints and not corruption / financial 
irregularities . This can  been modelled on the office of the Local Government Ombudsman in the 
United Kingdom and the City Ombudsman in Cape Town, where the ombudsman is an independent 
body with the mandate to investigate and resolve only service related complaints.   
A Greater Bengaluru Services Ombudsman will act as a trustee of citizens’ interests vis -à-vis the 
civic agencies and could be an effective channel to reduce the need for citizens to move the Courts 
through Public Interest Litigation. We currently have instances of citizens going to court for 
footpaths or getting the BBMP and the Pollution Control Board to address the garbage issue 
effectively.  
The key roles and responsibilities of Ombudsman will be restricted to civic services and often in the 
role of a med iator:  
•The agency has not fulfilled its service obligations w.r.t. maintenance of roads, garbage disposal 
or any such function which falls under its jurisdiction  
•The agency did not adhere to specified norms or procedures in its functioning or fulfilment o f 
service obligations 
•The agency has not addressed a citizen complaint fairly or adequately
•The Ombudsman shall take up cases related to interagency disputes or complaints related to 
territorial responsibility between agencies or municipalities . 
For this  to work, it needs to be constituted along the lines of similar oversight bodies like the Lok 
Ayukta. It can be a single member body with a five year tenure appointed by a Committee 
consisting of the Chief Minister of the State, the Speaker of the State Le gislative Assembly and the 
Leader of the Opposition in the Legislative Assembly. An Ombudsman shall be a retired person of 
repute and shall have experience in civil services or public or municipal administration or 
management sector, and if such person is a former civil servant, s/he shall be not below the rank of 
an Additional Chief Secretary to the State Government or a retired Judge of the High Court having 
jurisdiction in the State.  
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 24 
1.8 THE  LEGAL  PROVISIONS  REQUIRED  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
Fig 1m : 11 cities in Karnataka governed by KMC Act  
Bengaluru Municipal Corporation with a population of 10 million is governed by the same KMC Act 
that is applicable for a 3 lakh city like Tumkur  Municipal Corporation  (Fig 1m). It is over 9 times bigger 
than the next largest c ity (Hubli Dharwad) in the State but the governance and administration rules 
that govern it are the same. This is untenable and Bengaluru needs a separate Act that is customised 
for its special needs as a large, growing metropolis. The report contains the key elements needed in 
the new Act for Bengaluru. The Committee strongly recommends that a new Act to enable the governance of Bengaluru as per the 3 tier framework set out be done at the earliest to substitute the 
KMC Act. The Karnataka Town & Country Pla nning Act (KTCP) is another Act that needs to address 
Bengaluru’s concerns separate ly – currently  a small town like Belt angadi (population 7,746) follows 
the same KTCP rules applicable to Bengaluru.  
1.9 ACTIVITY
 MAPPING  ACROSS  THE  3 TIERS  
Activity mapping is  very important to determine which activity is best done at what level of the 3 tier 
governance structure. The Activity mapping of civic functions (citizen facing and back end) sets out 
what is needed for addressing quality of living in a city based on parameters involving Citizen 
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 25 interface, Criticality, Proximity, Externalities, Discretion and Economies of scale . This determines the 
ideal scale at which the activity should be undertaken (Ward, Zone, Municipal Corporation, GBA) for each  activity (Setting t echnical standards, Making service level promise, Planning, Capital asset 
creation, O&M, Monitoring) and who is accountable.  
Nearly 700 activities across 18 Government agencies has been mapped and set out in the Appendix. 
That is nearly 4,000 cells being mapped about where the activity should be undertaken. While this 
does not purport to be an exhaustive list, it can act as a starting list for agencies to review, modify and add as appropriate. Once that is done, this can roll out as process tasks, fixing accountability and 
an input for the job description.   
1.10 ADDRESSING
 THE  HUMAN  RESOURCES  CHALLENGE  
 
The entire BBMP Restructuring exercise is dependent on the quality of Human Resources that will plan 
and implement the desired outcomes. If this capacity challenge in the system is not fixed, all the 
systemic improvements set out in this report will be of no avail. The key focus needs to be on setting up 
a professional cadre of human resources with specialists manning tasks that need deep domain knowledge. Training of existing resources is necessary but will take time and considerable effort. In our 
view lateral recruitments at senior levels with professional qualifications and experience is imperative if 
the overall mission is to succeed.   
1.10.1  Professionalization of Human Resources: Municipal Corporations  
•Revision of C&R Rules  
oThe draft revised C&R Rules 2013 -14 to be further revised with suggestions made in the 
report  
•HR focus  
oA Human Resources cell  (manned by a professional with over 15 years’ experience)  at 
the GBA level to oversee, plan and manage the HR function including manpower 
planning, organisation design, recruitment, performance management including 
promotion, training,  transfers,  etc. 
•Lateral Entry  
oProfessional heads of departments and specialised positions  based on well -defined skills 
and competencies  
oOutsource the candidate selection process to independent, reputed academic 
institutions  
•Minimize reliance on Deputation  
oOnly in unavoidable cases  
oSelection subject to a rigorou s process of selection through the HR cell  
•Direct Recruitment  
oEncourage lateral recruitment  
oBuild a cadre of professional urban services professionals  over time  based on scientific 
estimation of requirements and skills / competencies needed  
oPromotion through a process similar to selection  
•Performance Assessment  
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 26 oPerformance linked incentives and disincentives  
oStringent annual performance review process  including skill based certification . 
1.10.2 Proposed Reorganization of Departments  
•Shifting Departments to GBA  from BBMP  
oMajor projects department to move to GBA  
oDepartment of Town Planning  (for Bengaluru)  & Legal cell  
•Reorganization of Departments  
oFor effective planning and control  
•Merging revenue generating departments
oRevenue, Advertisement a nd Markets under Department of Resources  
•Creating a Department of Ecology and Environment
oParks, Forests, and Lakes under one department  
oCurrently they are under 3 different departments  
•Discontinue Education Department  
oBetter handled by State Education department  
Low operations compared to  State schools  
•Strengthening Ward Administration  
oTo consider an a dditional Health inspector for Solid Waste Management  
oSenior most ward officer to be Ward Secretary to coordinate works  
•Rationalization and estimation of the  staff  
oScientific study needed to develop norms for estimating staff requirement  
oTake into account skills and competencies required and use of technological aids . 
1.11 THE  PUBLIC  FINANCE  DIMENSION 
Bengaluru collected  about Rs. 1,25,000 crores from taxes and user fees (Central taxes at about Rs. 
80,000 crores and balance from State and Local)  in 2014 -15.  A bout Rs. 18,000 crores  was spent on 
Bengaluru across all Civic agencies and Government d epartments  last year. Of this, about Rs. 5 ,700 
crores  is Capital expenditure. The Karnataka ICT group  (under IT / BT) has estimated  that Bengaluru 
needs about Rs. 2.25 lac cro res over 12 years – about Rs. 20,000 crores per year of capital inf usion. 
We need to find resources (financial and human capital) to increase the infrastructure spend by 
about Rs. 5,000 per year through increased own revenues, collection efficiencies, new revenue 
sources, pooled finances, increased State grants, etc.  Our s ugge stions for improving the financial 
health  revolve arou nd four themes – Financial Sustainability, Fiscal Decentralisation, Fiscal 
Responsibility and Budget Management, Transparency and Accountability.  
1.11.1 Financial Sustainability  
•Undertake an immediate medium term debt restructuring and fiscal recovery plan  for the BBMP  
•Set up the Greater Bengaluru Finance  Commission every five years as detailed earlier  
•Position a Finance and Accounting professional as Chief Financial Officer  (CFO)  at the GBA level 
to oversee full implementation of financial reforms and compliance  
•Implement an i ntegrate d financial management system at the GBA and Municipal Corporation 
level  
•Increased revenues from buoyant sources such as Property tax and Land based financing . 
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 27 1.11.2 Fiscal Decentralisation  
•Norms for flow back of proportion of select State taxes (eg. Stamps & Registrations) to GBA and 
Municipal Corporations  
•Set up Land and Property management division  under the CFO at the GBA  
•Introduce Treasury function including liquidity and debt management at the GBA reporting to 
CFO 
•Levy S ervice charges from all government / defence properties that avail municipal services.
1.11.3 Fiscal Responsibility & Budget Management  
•Follow Karnataka Municipal Accounting & Budgeting rules  2006 at the Municipal Corporations  
•Mandate 5 y ear Medium Term Fiscal Plan & how it will be met  with annual budgets aligned to it  
•Appoint independent Chartered Accountants as auditors of annual accounts, hasten the audit track and minimise a udit delays . 
1.11.4 Transparency & Accountability  
•Develop Performance MIS systems (daily, weekly, monthly, etc.) for use by Municipal 
Corporation heads, Commissioners, Department, Zonal heads  
oExpose relevant data to citizens  in Open data format  
•Appoint a Chief MIS officer in the Municipal Corporation  
•Move to an ERP system post full digitisation of Finance and Accounting  
•Review and improve IT systems  
•Use Karnataka Municipal Data Society for setting and measuring service levels  
•Build  credible balance sheet  for the Municipal Corporation starting with an Opening balance.  
1.11.5 Some improvement suggestions for revenues and cost control  
•Measures to improve property tax collection  
oLink property tax payers to spatial geo referenced building database  
Will identif y non payers  
Will identify those who are paying below estimated areas  
oCompare databases with BWSSB / BESCOM to identify non- residential users  
oA uniform Property Identification ( PID) system to be followed by all agencies  
Current ward based PID has to be replaced by an multi digit alphanumeric system 
since ward delimitation will make current PID redundant  
oRequest Courts to use property tax payment declaration as basis to identify owner –
tenant status in case of any complaints  
oEnsure guidance values updated regularly as basis for zone classification  
oImprove property tax systems at the back end  
•Better, transparent works management  
oPre-audit must be mandatory before any works undertaken  
oBroadcast works being undertaken online  
oMaintain and update history of works undertaken to identify and cancel ‘ghost’ works of a repetitive nature  
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 28 oPost audit and bill payment status to be put online  
•Revenue Augmentation
oScope for enhanced revenues from estates, hoardings, trade licences  
Create digital record of estates and returns from leased properties  
Use technology (holograms) to identify legitimate hoardings  
Transparency key to achieving these outcomes  
oReward  higher than budgeted collections by sharing part of enhanced revenue.  
1.12 CHANGES  IN PLANNING  PARADIGM  
 
The practice of an identical process being used for master planning for a city of 10 million (Bengaluru) 
and a smaller city of just 10 ,000 must be revisited. The Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act 
(KTCP) 1961 must enable custom variat ions based on size, urban footprint and complexity of urban 
centres .  
1.12.1 Scale of Plans  
Our suggestions on the s cale of plans within Bengaluru local planning area (LPA): 
•At GBA level  
oBengaluru Strategic Spatial Plan  
Strategic projects as output  
oLand use and DCR oriented development plan  
•Municipal level (Zone / Ward)  
oZone and Ward plans ; Projects  and Schemes .  
1.12.2 Strategic Spatial Planning  
Strategic Spatial P lanning  (SSP)  is suggested  at the GBA level as a transformational idea for planning. 
It sep arates the visioning tool from the regulatory tool. A few characteristics about SSP : 
•Driven by strategies for Mobility, Infrastructure Development  (Sectoral)  and Economic 
Development  
•Strategic projects are an output of SSP  
oStrategic projects target spatial  fragments that have catalytic effect  
•High inter Stakeholder consultations and negotiations
•SSP complements other planning tools  
•Links to budget, monitoring, evaluation, feedback, adjustment and revision . 
1.12.3 BASIC: Bengaluru Spatial Information Centre  
As part of data collection and analysis, the Committee embarked on a drive to collect and compile 
all spatial (and relevant non -spatial) data from the various government agencies. This was brought 
onto a common GIS platform which we have christened BASIC – Bengaluru Spatial I nformation 
Centre. We have about 102 layers (point, line, polygons) of information with attributes about various aspects of the city (eg. lakes, buildings, roads, police stations, dry waste collection centres, bus routes, property tax, etc.). This spatial database was critical for the Committee in finally arriving 
at the proposed 5 Corporations. On a regular basis, this spatial database could be a very useful 
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 29 planning and assessment tool. This needs to be kept current and data sharing pr otocols with the 
agencies and public needs to evolve. For instance, the commons like lakes, forests, parks, etc. with 
the buffer areas could be put out for the public to view online. They could then become custodians of the public properties  and not fall p rey to any unscrupulous sellers . 
We propose having a  Spatial Repository Act for handling spatial digital assets and housing the large 
spatial database at an appropriate centre.  This will make the entire exercise  sustainable over the 
long run.  
1.13 WILL
 THE  SUGGESTIONS  HELP  FIX  THE  MULTIPLE  DEFICITS? 
 
At the outset we had identified a set of infirmities with the current BBMP system. The table below 
sets out how some of the multiple deficits are addressed by the Committee’s suggestions:  
Deficit  Addressing the deficit  
Ineffective  Governance 
& Administration  3 tier Governance structure; 5 year M ayoral term; Empowered Zones; 
Parastatal integration; Corporation department s’ reorganisation  
No voice for citizens Empowered Ward Committees; Greater Bengaluru Services  Ombudsman
Trust deficit  Financial transparency; Proactive disclosure ; More voice for the citizens  
Accountability  Activity mapping for clearer role definitions; Greater Bengaluru Services  
Ombudsman; Smaller governance and administration structures  
Poor Human Resources  Change in C&R rules; Lateral recruitment; Urban services cadre; Training  
Lack of transparency  Financial transparency; Proactive disclosure  
Financial 
Mismanagement  Smaller governance set up to improve property tax collections; 
Expenditure control measures; Greater Bengaluru Finance  Commission; 
Computerisation  
Planning deficiencies  Strategic & Spatial P lans; Economic Devt agenc ies; Municipalisation 
Committee
Implementation 
challenges  Better human resources; Citizen oversight; Mega projects from GBA ; 
Mandated inter agency coordination and cooperation  
 
This report sets out the desired direction across Legal aspects, Activity map, Human Resources, 
Finance, Planning, etc. Once the broad recommendations are accepted, these suggestions can be 
honed and finalised during the implementation phase.  
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 30 1.14 ADDRES SING FREQUENTLY VOICED  CONCERNS 
 
During the course of the discussions with Stakeholders and in media articles, there have been 
concerns voiced about making changes to the current system. Some of the common concerns and 
our response:  
  
•Better administration and empowered Zones would do the job. Why are we splitting the 
Corporation and putting in a 3 tier structure?  
oThe current system of 261 Council members in a single central Corporation with the myriad Standing Committees is dysfunctional and over half the c itizen population on 
the outskirts are being neglected  
oDevolution coupled with decentralised operations and citizen participation at the 
ward level has a better chance of meeting citizen needs and aspirations
oParastatal integration, Mega infrastructure pro visioning, Mobility solutions and 
Economic Development will be facilitated by the GBA 
oWe need a solution that works over time as the population doubles in 25 years. A single central unit cannot manage the population sprawl. The Municipalisation 
Committee will ensure a managed transition of overgrown villages into the city eco 
system . 
•The Bengaluru brand will be affected by splitting the BBMP Corporation  
oNot at all.  In fact it will be further strengthened since the smaller Municipal 
Corporations will allow for the place to be better managed through devolution and 
decentralisation  
oThe change in Governance structure and the reform measures suggested will improve the quality of life  in the city making Bengaluru an  attractive destination for investment 
and jobs  
oThe GBA set up will ensure that the Bengaluru brand does not get diluted.
•Will there be inter Municipal conflicts? What about Municipal Corporations that are relatively poor in resources and infrastructure  
oWe foresee healthy competition among the Municipal  Corporations in terms of service 
level promise and delivery. There has been no conflict between wards and zones 
currently  
oThere are coordination mechanisms for inter Municipal issues at the GBA, inter Zone at the Municipal Corporation and inter ward at th e Zonal level  
oThe Greater Bengaluru Finance  Commission will suggest the necessary financial transfer 
mechanisms to cover for relatively poor Municipal Corporations . 
•The costs of a multiple Municipal Corporation set up will be high  
oThere will be additional costs that we estimate at around Rs. 150 crores with 5 Corporations and 10 Zones (20% increase in current salary and administration costs with 
                                                                                                                                          
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Page : 31 infrastructure investments). This will be more than offset with the gains from the 
Restructuring
oSmaller units and incentives for wards to raise additional property tax is expected to 
bring in at least Rs. 1,000 -1,500 crores initially and a steady stream of regular additional 
income / savings as the smaller units are more alert to further revenue mobilisation and 
expenditure control  
oFocus and measure return on investment rather than looking at it as additional costs .  
•The character of Bengaluru will be lost through the division 
oNot at all. The 5 Municipal Corporations have been carefully selected to ensure a fine balance of the essential demographics and characteristics of Bengaluru  
•Bengaluru’s major problems relate to garbage and traffic. How will these suggestions fix it?
oThe smaller Corporation set up and the emphasis on resolving the garbage processing 
within the Corporation limits will go a long way to move away from the current model of 
transportation and dumping to badly managed land fills  
oMobility will be handled by the GBA by bringing in all the transport related stakeholders 
together. This is expected to prov ide better outcomes over the current silo 
arrangements.  
1.15 TRANSITION
 PLAN  
If the Government decides to go ahead with the Committee’s recommendations, a list of next steps 
has been set out under the implementation and transition plan. About 6 months would be  needed to 
transition to the new arrangement. It is dependent on the legal sanctions which is likely to impact the overall time plan for shifting to a new set up detailed under the proposed BBMP Restructuring.  The 
Committee is confident that adopting the m easures set out will make Bengaluru regain its rightful 
position among the world’s leading cities.  
Area -Month  1 2 3 4 5 6 
Legal Acts, Enactment              
Ward delimitation        
   Corporations & Zones  
      
  BBMP - HR policy roll out  
       
  Activity mapping      
Municipalisation Committee          
  GB Finance  Commission  
       
  GB Services  Ombudsman  
         
 GIS Repository Act & Spatial 
centre        
   Economic Development Agency            
 BBMP process improvements         
  BBMP  asset transfer planning  
         
                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
 
BENGALURU:  KARNATAKA’S PRIME URBAN CENTRE  
Page : 32 
TOTAL    POPULATION    
SETTLEMENT HIERARCHY (text) and NUMBER OF URBAN SETTLEMENTS (numbers)
1
3
22
39
 105
163
14155
27,242 (Number of 
small villages)
1943
0
5 Million
10 Million
150000
200000
250000
300000
350000
400000
Metropolitan
City II
Large city 
 Medium
Town II
Medium
Town I
Small
Town II
Small
Town I
Smallest
Towns
Large
Village
Small
Village
Uninhabited
Villages
Bengal uru
22
Hubli –Dharwad
Mysore
Mangalore
14
155
1943
Uninhabited
SETTLEMENT HIERARCHY
 (text) and NUMBER OF URBAN 
URBAN POPULATION -RURAL POPULATION
2BENGALURU:  KARNATAKA’S  PRIME  URBAN  CENTRE  
2.1 KARNATAKA  FACES  INEVIT ABLE  URBANIZATION  
Karnataka faces inevitable urbanization, despite a current majority of rural residents  Karnataka . With a 
population of 6.1 crore people Karnataka is the 7th most urbanized State in India with 38.7% of its 
population residing in urban areas1. The urban population is distributed into 347 towns, with Bengaluru 
being the largest urban agglomeration housing 36% of the State’s urban population. The Bengaluru Urban 
District (which includes Bengaluru and Anekal) is the most urbanized district in the State at 90.4%. 
(Census Data , 2011). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
Fig 2a: Distribution of urban and rural population in Karnataka across various settlement types  
Data Source: Census, Categories adapted from Census, Draft URDPFI Guidelines and others, Graph generated by EMBARQ - WRI India  
 
 
Despite unprecedented urbanization, the bulk of the population of Karnataka continues to live in its 
villages as seen in Fig 2a . This complete picture of the State’s population reveals 61% of the population 
(3.74 Crore) stay in 27,242 small and 155 large v illages.  
                                                             
1 As per Census of India an urban area is one which has a municipality, corporation, cantonment board or  notified town 
area  committee, or satisfies criteria of i) A minimum population of 5,000 ii) At least 75 per cent of the male main 
working population engaged in non- agricultural pursuits  iii) A density of population of at  least  400 persons per sq. km.  
                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
 
BENGALURU:  KARNATAKA’S PRIME URBAN CENTRE  
Page : 33 
Urbanisation in the State is primarily nestled in Class 12 towns, which accommodated nearly 68% of the 
total urban population in 2011. Bengaluru city alone, contributes 53% of the population of the Class I 
cities. A spurt in the growth of smaller  towns is noted with Class 5 and Class 6 Census towns witnessing 
growth rates of 196% and 180% respectively in the last decade. This rampant growth of smaller towns 
however does not make much of a dent as it contribut es barely 3% of the total urban populat ion of the 
State as shown in Fig 2b. 
Census 
Class  No of towns 
(2001)  No of towns 
(2011)  % Decadal 
growth rate  Population        (in 
2011 in lakhs)  % of total urban 
population of state  
Class 1  24 26 8 %  160.05  67.74 %  
Class 2  27 39 44 %  24.82  10.50 %  
Class 3  101  105  4 %  32.63  13.81 %  
Class 4  53 83 57 %  12.43  5.26 %  
Class 5  27 80 196 %  5.76  2.44 %  
Class 6  5 14 180 %  0.56  0.24 %  
Total  237  347    236.25  100  % 
 
Fig 2 b: Distribution of urban population in Karnataka as per census classification  
Data Source and categories:  Census 2001 and 2011, Table generated by EMBARQ - WRI India  
 
There are indications of a declining growth rate in the population of the State over time which is a pattern 
seen across several Indian States. With  inevitable urbanization, Karnataka is set to be more than 50% 
urbanized by 2031, with an urban population of 39.6 million. As per census 2011, cultivators and agriculture laborers – who are part of the primary sector - constitute about 49% of the total workforce in 
the State.  
 
 
Fig 2c: Shifting share of urban and rural population in Karnataka and population growth rates  
Data Source: Census of India and Karnataka Vision 2008, Graph generated by EMBARQ - WRI India  
                                                             
2 Census of India groups urban areas based on population. Class 1 towns indicate those towns which have at least 
1,00,000 persons as population  
                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
 
BENGALURU:  KARNATAKA’S PRIME URBAN CENTRE  
Page : 34 
Bengaluru
Dharwad
Mysore
Mangalore
Gulbarga
Belgaum
Hubli
Davangere
Bellary
Bijapur
TumkurMany districts of the State are facing multiple issues underlined by various socio -economic indicators. 
North eastern districts of the state including Koppal, Raichur, Bidar, Yadgir, Gulbarga, Bijapur and Gadag 
and southern districts of Chamrajnagar, Koda gu, Chikballapur, Ramanagra, Bengaluru Rural lack access  to 
physical infrastruct ure, social infrastructure, have low urbanization levels and per capita income.  
 Total Built up area (rural and urban) is only 0.6 % of the total geographical area of the State. Urban 
population largely is concentrated along the tr ansport corridors of Bengaluru -Belgaum, Mysore - Kolar 
and Mangalore – Karwar (coastal tract). However, this built up area exert s immense pressure on natural 
resources, leaving behind an irreversible and disproportionate ecological footprint . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Fig 2d: Karnataka Land Use Land Cover Map 2011 - 12 
Data Source: Digital Map Thematic Services, Land Use Land Cover -50K map/NRC, NRSC/ISRO – India  
                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
 
BENGALURU:  KARNATAKA’S PRIME URBAN CENTRE  
Page : 35 
Proportion of people out of 
every 10 getting added to an 
urban centre 
Bengal uru
2.4
Other Class 
I towns
4.3
Class II
0.9
1.7
Class III
Class IV 
0.5
Class V & VI
0.1
Bengal uru
5.7
Other Class 
I towns
1.5
Class II
0.9
0.6
Class III
Class IV 
0.7
Class V & VI
0.6
Census 2001
 Census 2011
2.2 BENGAL URU  RECEIVES  THE  LION’S  SHARE  OFKARNATAKA’S  URBANIZATION  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
Fig 2e: Bengalu ru’s increasing share of the States urban growth  
Data Source and categories:  Census 2001 and 2011, Image generated by EMBARQ - WRI India  
 
The capital city Bengaluru has been experiencing the lion’s share of urbanisation in the State. Census 
2001 revealed that  for every 10 people being added to an urban area in Karnataka, Bengaluru had a share 
of 2.4 people. Census 2011 however shows that out of every 10 people, 5.7 are getting added to 
Bengaluru alone increasing its dominance in terms of urban population share  thereby reducing the share 
that goes to other Classes of Towns. This growth in population includes natural growth, urban to urban migration and rural to urban migration.  
 The access to economic opportunity coupled with physical and social infrastructure availability has continued to attract people to this city:  
o80%
3of global IT companies have based their India operations and R & D centers in Bengaluru ; It 
is the 4th largest technology cluster in the world;  
oThe city has attracted 6% of the country’s Foreign Direct Investment; Bengaluru Urban District 
has contributed 33.8% to GSDP at Current Prices (Economic Survey Report 2013 -14); 
oBengaluru accounts for 80% 4of the sales tax and 75% of the corporate tax collection in 
the state;  
                                                             
3Advantage Karnataka, The Gateway of Innovative India, Karnataka Udyog Mitra, 
http://nriforumkarnataka.org/Brochure/Advantage%20Karnataka%20Brochure.pdf  
4 Draft Urban Development Policy for Karnataka, 2009, Urban Development Department, GoK  
                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
 
BENGALURU:  KARNATAKA’S PRIME URBAN CENTRE  
Page : 36 
2011  
2001  
1991  
1981  
1971  
1961  
1951  
1941  
1931  
1921  
1911  
1901  
Timeline by Year  
Bengal uru  
Hubli -Dharwad  
Mysore  
Gulbarga  
Mangalore  
Robertsonpet  
Belgaum  
Davanagere  
Bellary  
Bijapur  
Shimoga  
Tumkur  
Raichur  
Bidar  
Hospet  
Gadag  
Robertsonpet
Hassan  
Bhadravati  
 Bhadravati
Chitradurga  
 Chitradurga
Udipi  
oBengaluru has been identified as the country’s Silicon Valley and is one of the 
technological innovation hubs with a score of 135 out of 16 (UNDP 2001);  
oBengaluru in addition to being a center for IT and IT based industries, also has numerous 
other leading commercial and educational institutions, industries such as textiles, heavy 
machinery, aviation, space and biotechnology, garments, etc.  
oBengaluru’s projected GDP for 2015 is 32.7 billion USD (Karnataka 82.1 bn USD)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
Figure 2f: Zipf’s Law applied from 1901 until 2011 to the top 20 urban centers in Karnataka  
Data Source and categories:  Census of India 1901 upto  2011, Image generated by EMBARQ - WRI India  
 
Using Zipf ’s law to plot the changes in the top 20 urban settlements in Karnataka from 1901 up to 2011 
indicates that Bengaluru has always been the undisputed leader in the State’s urban hierarchy and is not 
a new phenomenon. It is interesting to note that Bengaluru (84, 95,492 population in 2011) which 
emerges as the largest city has taken the lead by almost 9 times from its nearest contender (Hubli -
Dharwad and Mysore which have a population of under 1 million each). Zipf’ s law which follows a rank 
size rule expects the largest urban centre to be twice as large as the second largest urban centre, thrice as 
large as the third largest urban centre and so on. The fact that Bengaluru doesn’t fall anywhere close to 
this rule, proves the magnitude of concentrated growth and  the city’s strong urban primacy. The city 
grew from a population of about 0.4 million spread over 70 sq.km in 1941 to one holding over  8 million people in 709 sq.km in 2011.  
                                                             
5Almost at par with San Francisco(USA),while  Silicon  Valley (USA)isnumber1withascoreof 16  
                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
 
BENGALURU:  KARNATAKA’S PRIME URBAN CENTRE  
Page : 37 
Once a simple trading centre founded by Kempegowda in 153 7, Bengaluru later dev eloped into a military 
and commercial centre during the Muslim and British rule in 17th and 18th century . During the British 
rule, the administrative centre was shifted to Bengaluru from Mysore and the largest cantonment board 
of South India was established here. The spikes in population growth as seen for Bengaluru (Fig 2c are 
clearly attributable to several favourable policies and decisions being focussed on the city especially post -
independence such as the setting up of key central government institutions, the benefits of liberalisation 
and more recently municipal area expansion.   
2.3 IMPLICATIONS  FOR  THE  FUTURE  OF URBANIZATION  IN KARNATAKA 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
Fig 2g: Shifting share of GDP contribution by sector from 1961 - 2021 in Karnataka  
Data Source and categories:  Census of India, McKinsey, Karnataka State Planning Board; Graph generated by EMBARQ - WRI India  
 
Structural changes have been witnessed in the State’s economy. The agricultural sector which made the 
highest contributions to GDP in the 60s was barely contributing 17% in 2011. This share is expected to 
reduce to just 6% in the next 10 years (2021) but yet will have 60% of the rural workforce dependent on this income. There is cause for concern in the fact that the size of the workforce dependent on the 
primary sector is not commensurate with its share in the GDP. The tertiary sector powered predominantly by Bengaluru’s city- region now contributes to 57% of the GDP of the State.  
 On the demographic front a positive dividend is noted as Karnataka’s working population (15 -59 age 
groups) is set to increase by 7.7 million between 2006 and 2026. This means an average of 0.4 million 
people are expected to enter the workforce each year up to 2026. This requires a significant increase in 
employm ent opportunities, and appropriate education and skill development of the workforce. In the 
same period, the 60+ population is also expected to rise significantly from 38.4 lakh to 96.8 lakh, calling for an increase in geriatric services as well.  With the State becoming more urban than rural by 2031, 
several challenges will be thrown up such as the need for urban jobs, urban skill set development, urban 
infrastructure, sustainable development challenges and the institutional capacity to absorb and manage 
this scale of impending urbanization. 73% of the total GDP of the State would be contributed by urban 
areas by 2030 and would be dominated by the tertiary sector  
 
                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
 
BENGALURU:  KARNATAKA’S PRIME URBAN CENTRE  
Page : 38 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
Fig 2i: Population Pyramid in 2006 and 2026 for Karnataka  
Data Source and categories:  Projections for States 2001 -2026, Office of the Registrar General & Census Commissioner, India  
 
The urbanisation trend is inevitable and the State needs to address this shift as follows:  
•Bengaluru being the global identity of the State and its main revenue turner , must retain its 
primacy and competitive edge . It should  be a ccorded a special status to be able to plan and manage 
its complex functioning and needs  
•Urban centres other than Bengaluru need facilitation and government led incentives t o attract 
investments, attract future migration from rural areas, maximise on resources and focus on the 
provision of basic infrastructure and amenities to improve quality of life and foster a good trade and business environment  
•Concepts such as twin cities, urban complexes and urban clusters could be explored across the 
State so as to pool and share resources, social and physical infrastructure and administrative staff 
while increasing dependency on each other. This could result in creating a threshold pa th towards a 
better and self -sustaining urban future  
•Similarly higher order villages having central location and having a potential for development 
within its catchment area, could be provided with basic social facilities for population from smaller villa ges engaged in agriculture and other primary activities. Linking of State Industrial Policy is the 
key to their future  
•Regional infrastructure when planned appropriately can strategically link lagging areas with 
leading areas and markets. Administrative divisions should not deter inclusive policies for areas 
across jurisdictions. A regional approach for large urban centres becomes a necessity  
•There is a need to think of a regional development strategy for Karnataka with a focus on 
developing ‘live and work’  clusters in an innovative manner. Each region should have an anchor 
‘airport’ city with 6 -8 nodes with high speed connectivity;  Clusters of economic activity and 
livelihood possibilities (with appropriate skill training) for the local communities will pr ovide the 
employment opportunities; Proactive physical and social infrastructure provisioning and ability to attract private capital for the regional development plan through enabling frameworks could go a 
long way in helping other areas of Karnataka develop in a balanced manner reducing the pressure on Bengaluru as the predominant growth engine.  
                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
 
BENGALURU:  KARNATAKA’S PRIME URBAN CENTRE  
Page : 39 
2.4 IMPACT  ON  BENGALURU  
The chart below shows the increase in urban area (built up as in Land Use Land Cover) over six years. 
This represents an increase of 13 sqkms / year in BBMP area, 29 sq  kms/year in the BDA area and about 
60 sq  kms / year in the BMRDA region.  
 
 
 
 
  
Fig 2j: Bengaluru’s expansion 2006 -12 
                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
 
BENGALURU:  KARNATAKA’S PRIME URBAN CENTRE  
Page : 40  The Centre of Ecological Studies, Indian Institute of Science has been crying itself hoarse of the serious 
ecological damage to Bengaluru due to its rampant, unchecked growth model over the past four decades.  
The satellite image below from 1973 to 2010 conveys the toll this rapid, unplanned, unregulated 
growth has taken on Bengaluru. 
The quality of life has diminished considerably and is reflected in the challenges in managing the 
city’s urban sprawl, infrastructure, traffic, garbage, water, sewerage, shrinking open, public spaces, pollution, etc.     
 
 Fig 2k:  Bangalore to Ben galuru - Changing land use dynamics. Source: IISc- CES, Blr  
 
 
Key highlights from its ENVIS Technical report 93 of June 2015:  
 
•Infrastructure stress on ecosystem : Growth in Bengaluru has surpassed the threshold evident 
from stress on supportive capacity (insufficient water, clean air and water, inadequate electricity, 
solid waste, traffic bottlenecks, etc.) and assimilative capacity (polluted water and sediments in 
water bodies, enhanced GHG – Greenhouse gases, etc.)  
 
•Loss of wetlands, green spaces : There  has been a 925% increase in built up area (concretisation, 
paved surfaces) in Bengaluru from 1973 to 2013 with a sharp decline of 79% area in water bodies, 
78% in trees affecting the micro- climate, water availability, etc. Water table has declined to 300 m 
from 28 m over two decades. The frequent flooding (since 2000, even during normal rainfall) in Bengaluru is a consequence of the increase in impervious area with the high -density urban 
development in the catchment, drain encroachments and loss of wetlands, vegetation.  

                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
 
BENGALURU:  KARNATAKA’S PRIME URBAN CENTRE  
Page : 41  
•Pollution and Climate change : Higher level of GHGs (Greenhouse gases) in the air environment, 
nutrient and heavy metal rich water bodies and land. Urban heat island phenomenon is evident from large number of localities with higher local temperatures. The pattern of growth in Bengalur u 
and its implication on local climate of an increase of ~2 to 2.5 ºC during the last decade. There is about one tree for seven persons in the city. This is insufficient even to sequester respiratory carbon 
(due to breathing which ranges from 540 -900 g pe r person per day).  
          
It is realised that any strategies for a regional development in Karnataka will take time to yield dividends. 
Meanwhile Bengaluru is facing the ravages of extreme growth leading to a destruction of ecological systems and deteriorating quality of life. Consequently, it is necessary to think proactively about making Bengaluru a far better place on infrastructure and quality of life indicators. This effort of the Expert Committee on BBMP Restructuring aims to do that by analy sing the shortcomings in the current system, 
analysing relevant data and suggesting the way ahead based on global best practices, stakeholder feedback and what’s appropriate in the local Bengaluru context.  
 
                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
MULTIPLE CORPORATIONS: EXPERIENCES  
Page : 42 3MULTIPLE CORPORATIONS:  EXPERIENCES  
3.1 BENGALURU  TO  BANGALORE  TO  BENGALURU:  SHORT  HISTORY  
3.1.1 Bengaluru  founding history  
 
•Founded by Magadi  Kempegowda under the Vijayanagar Empire in 1537.  Kempe Gowda also referred 
to the new town as his "Gandu  Bhoomi" or "Land of Heroes"  
•The fort, which Kempe Gowda built at this place consisted of eight gates, the most prominent of which 
were the Yelahanka gate in the North, the Hala soor gate in the East, the Anekal gate in the South and 
the Kengeri gate in the West  
•Town was divided into Pete/ Markets. The town had two main streets: Chickkapete  Street(East -West) 
and Doddapete Street (North -South). Their intersection formed Doddapete square — the heart of then 
Bengaluru  
•His successor Kempegowda II built the 4 towers predicting the limits of the growth of the city in 
future. The towers were built in four corners of the then city keeping the Dharmaswamy temple as the 
focal point.  
3.1.2 Municipal history  
 
•The civic history can be traced back to 1850 when citizens of the old town of Bengaluru  constituted 
themselves into a Municipal Board under the provision of the Municipal Act XXVI of 1850  
•Almost simultaneously, a similar board was constituted for the Civic Administration of the 
Cantonment area  
•By 1892, both these municipalities were free fr om direct British rule and elections were introduced  
•The two municipalities were merged to form a City Corporation in 1951 under the Bangalore City 
Corporation Act 1949 with 7 divisions and a population of 0.75 million  
•“….. Most of the cities of India remind one certainly of the present, certainly of the future but essentially of 
the past. But Bangalore, more than any other great city of India, is a picture of the future ….. ”- Jawaharlal 
Nehru ’s addressing a Bangalore City Corporation event in April 17,  1962  
•BMP  divisions rose to 87 in 1991  as Bangalore Mahangar  Palike (BMP)  
•BMP subsequently had 100 wards since 1995 
                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
MULTIPLE CORPORATIONS: EXPERIENCES  
Page : 43 •In 2007, the S tate government issued a notification to merge the BMP (226 sq  kms) with adjoining 
Councils and Villages to form the Bruh at B angalore Mahanagara Palike ( BBMP  – 709.5 sq  kms)  with 
198 wards . 
3.2 THE  AMALGAMATION  PHASE  
Bangalore (now Bengaluru) has been one of the fastest growing urban regions in India. I n the last 2 
decades it has grown from 4.1 million in 1991 to 9.6 Million in 2011 in the Urban Agglomeration area. 
BBMP (Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagar a Palike) is the largest single municipal corporation in India  
covering an area of 709 .5 square kms  with a 20 15 population of over 10 million.  
In 2007, the Bangalore Mahanagara  Palike (BMP) with an area of 226 sq  kms catering then to a 
population of 6.5 million was amalgamated with 7 City Municipal Corporations (CMC), 1 Town Municipal 
Corporation (TMC)and 110 vil lages to form Bruhat  Bangalore Mahanagara Palike (BBMP). This expanded 
the scope of BBMP to cover 709 .5 sq kms, governing around 7.8 million citizens  in 2007 .  
 
The prime rationale for the amalgamation into BBMP was the poor governance and negligible 
infrastructure provisioning in the CMC / TMC and villages. A case was made that by integrating it with 
BMP, there was scope to optimize expenditure and bring in efficienc y in service delivery through access 
to better resources centrally. The 2007 amalgamation exercise primarily focused on expanding the 
physical boundaries to bring the extended area as one contiguous urbanised area. There was no road map 
about what was to be done about the peri -urban areas  as they become increasingly urban in the years to 
come. At that point of time, it was felt that just adding the 98 wards to BMP to make it BBMP would make 
for vastly improved conditions in the newly added wards. With the passa ge of 7 years, there has been a 
gap in expectation versus the reality on the ground. The newer areas, particularly the 110 villages, 
continue to languish in terms of basic infrastructure even today.  
 
While the focus is on the City Corporation, BBMP, multi ple agencies are involved in providing civic 
services. Many of them are referred to as Parastatals – BWSSB for water & sewerage, BESCOM for power, 
BMTC for bus transport, BDA for extended city planning and development, etc.  The key Government agencies ope rating in Bengaluru and their jurisdictions are set out below:  
   
                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
MULTIPLE CORPORATIONS: EXPERIENCES  
Page : 44  
 
Fig 3a : Mapping urban civic services in Bengaluru
3.3 COMPARING  BENGALURU  WITH  OTHER  CITIES  GLOBALLY  
 
A grid map of 21 cities (Fig 3b) with population range 4 -12 + million and area range 200 -1800 sq  kms is 
set out. It is noticed that of the 8 cities with population of over 9 million, only 2 cities in the world have a 
single Corporation (‘Dense’ Mumbai with an area of 463 sq  kms and Benga luru with an area of 709 .5 sq 
kms). Mumbai is actually a tale of multiple Corporations when we see the immediate regional view. Further, once a city reaches the 7 -8 million population range, the number of Corporations tends to rise 
from a solitary one to m ultiple Corporations. London (32) and Johannesburg (7) are exceptions in the 
sense that they had multiple Municipal Corporations even at lower population levels.  
 
 
 
  

                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
MULTIPLE CORPORATIONS: EXPERIENCES  
Page : 45 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
    
 
    
 
  Fig 3b: Global cities: Population, Area and # of Municipal Corporations  
 
A listing of 28 cities with area, population and lowest elected unit is set out  (Fig 3c). The Metropolitan 
view of the subject is interesting too for the large number of municipalities in the region. For regions with 
population between 14 -26 million, the number of Municipalities range from 8 -60 Municipalities . 
 
                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
MULTIPLE CORPORATIONS: EXPERIENCES  
Page : 46  
 
Fig 3 c: Global cities Demographics and Governance  
 
Another useful data to view is the City Regions. The 7 City regions set out in Fig 3d are all multiple 
municipal entities from 8 to 60 Municipalities. The Bengaluru city region (Bengaluru Metropolitan 
Regional Development Authority – BMRDA) has the least number of municipal entities over 8000 sqkms. 
 
   

                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
MULTIPLE CORPORATIONS: EXPERIENCES  
Page : 47  
 
Fig 3d: City Regions  
3.4 COMPARISON  WITH  OTHER  METRO  REGIONS  IN INDIA  
Exhibit 4A -D has a detailed comparison of 6 Metropolitan regions in India – Delhi  (National Capital 
Territory) , Mumbai, Kolkatta, Chennai, Hyderabad and Bengaluru. The analysis covers the following 
parameters – Demography, Political primacy, Economy, Water & Sewerage, Solid waste Management, 
Energy and Mobility. 
3.5 LEARNINGS  FROM  OTHER  CITIES 
Given the complexity of the task at hand and its repercussions for the future of the Bengaluru, the 
Committee recognised  the need to look  at examples from other cities in India and globally to understand 
how they have dealt with similar challenges to help formulate an informed opinion. The key findings:  
• Top mega -cities follow multi -municipal structures   
Study of global cities with a population over 8 million  suggest that they increasingly follow a multi -
municipal governance structure with an umbrella metropolitan government at the regional scale. Some of 
the well -known examples include world class cities such as London and Tokyo. Lond on has a population 
of 8.2 million, comprised of 32 boroughs and a metropolitan government constituted of a directly elected 

                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
MULTIPLE CORPORATIONS: EXPERIENCES  
Page : 48 Mayor and assembly  council. While Tokyo with a population of 15 million is divided into 23 ‘special 
wards’ that act as mini -cities with a metropolitan government headed by the Mayor, as the chief executive 
of the Tokyo Metropolitan Government. Other examples with comparable population in developing 
economies include Lima (43 districts), Jakarta (6 municipalities) and Sao Paulo (31 bor oughs).  
 
Recent examples of splitting a Corporation are from Delhi where the municipal corporation was trifurcated in 2012 and Dhaka where it was bifurcated in 2011. S ources indicate that the prime drivers 
were to reduce the burden on service providers and  improve the citizen experience of civic services 
through efficient management.  
 
• Decentralization and devolution of powers felt useful as cities grow  
With greater number of people living in cities, the rise of the megacity scale, decentralization has been  
seen globally as a way to expand the supply and effectiveness  of public services to the urban population 
with a focus on citizens, as well as increase citizen participation in public policy and improving accountability.  
 The example of Sao Paulo is worth mentioning as a recent case where decentralization and devolution was conceived in 2003 as a way to expand the supply and effectiveness of public services. Sao Paulo then 
had a population of 10.3 million, and was 1500 sqkm s in area. The city undertook creation of boroughs 
and installation of participatory budgeting to address a broader ‘democratic deficit’. The unique aspect was that it was the first time it took “population size as requirement for both action and quality o f the 
administration.”  As reported, t he process of decentralization had an impact on not just provision of public 
services but also on political and administrative polity. The emphasis on the territory as a geographic and 
social space was central to the provision of services to the population and strengthening localities to 
produce public policy and extend democracy.  
 
• Finding optimal scale and size of governance is an iterative process 
With respect to size and number of sub -divisions however, there seems to  be no one size fits all solution. 
The key enquiry about how to decide, how to sub -divide seems to be about achieving the optimal scale 
and size of governance structures that foster higher liveability, economic vibrancy, inclusion, and sustainability.  
It is also observed that  the discovery of the optimal configuration of governance layers and how civic 
responsibilities are organized may not be a onetime act but a process of iteration. As seen in London, the 32 borough configuration and service responsibilit ies are not immutable. Reports point to how due to 
                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
MULTIPLE CORPORATIONS: EXPERIENCES  
Page : 49 recent fiscal stress some boroughs have been collaborating for service deliveries such as health and waste 
management (London waste) to reach new economy of scale and reduce costs.  
 
To indicate the iterat ive nature of the sub division process, in London there have been discussions to 
align new governance to changing urban context, include Ken Livingston’s (former Mayor) proposal to make London into 5 ‘Super Boroug hs’. Meanwhile the Green party  prefers  further scaling down Boroughs 
to increase local level governance. These ongoing debates demonstrate how determining size of municipalities/service delivery body is also about balancing need to meet economies of scale and local 
scale accountability.  
 
• The nu mber of Corporations  is based on balancing power, economy & accountability  
When comparing the larger vs smaller sub -divisions, the trend show lesser number of sub -divisions 
would make for a  stronger top tier government. Further, since the sub -divisions wou ld be  larger in size, 
comparable to smaller cities, they can have more real power, more independence in providing services 
and more capital at their disposal. Though the case of Delhi suggests, fewer sub -divisions (3 divisions, 
population 5.6 million per m unicipality) might also lead to more conflicts between the municipalities for 
resources given their relatively large size.   
On the other hand, smaller sub -divisions such as seen in London (32 boroughs, average population 
248,000 per municipality)  or Sao P aulo (31 boroughs, average population 400,000 per municipality), can 
lead to making of a true local area government with closer relationship between citizens and elected 
representative. What has been noticed in these cities is that since no single municipality is very large, there is less inter municipal differences and less conflict between the roles of Metropolitan authority and 
local level governance.  
 
However, as in London boroughs, they may have to resort to more inter -borough cooperation based 
service  delivery. The support of the super boroughs proposal for London points to how consensus 
forming process for planning and development can be a cumbersome process for large city wide projects.  
The number of sub -divisions is also noted to impact the burden to find additional human resource for 
multiple municipalities in various areas such as  planning, engineering, environmental health  etc. as 
pointed out in case of Delhi trifurcation.  
 
                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
MULTIPLE CORPORATIONS: EXPERIENCES  
Page : 50 • Clarity in roles and responsibilities between the local and t he regional levels is necessary  
In London, services are organized between Greater London Authority, the London Metropolitan 
government and the Boroughs at a local government level outlining who is responsible for planning, 
execution, coordination and regulation. True political power is devolved at the boroughs level and the civic services are integrated at the regional level. For example Greater London Authority  is responsible 
for strategic planning (London Plan), policing, the fire service, most aspects of transport and economic development for Greater London. Boroughs are responsible for basic local area services such as local planning, schools, social  services, maintenance of local road, waste collection and disposal. This layered 
governance structure and devolution of responsibilities is made possible due to fiscal devolution to the Boroughs.  What the above example shows is that decentralization has to be accompanied by devolution 
of powers and has to get reintegrated at the regional level for the entire city – region to work effectively.  
 
• The case for political and administrative decentralization  
One of the strong points made by proponents of multiple Corporations is that waste can be better managed locally. Many developed cities have realised that the centralised waste disposal model is non-
sustainable. London, for instance, which had a central waste disposal till the 90s have shifted the responsibility of waste disposal to the Boroughs. One ha s witnessed inter -borough coordination to get 
mutually beneficial outcomes. As mentioned earlier, property tax revenue collection gets a fillip with smaller municipalities. This is due to better collection efficiency and scope for rezoning around multiple city centres. Early reports from Delhi indicate an improved property tax c ollection post the trifurcation 
though there have been challenges due to the economic disparity between the 3 Corporations.  A ward locality voice can be better heard in smaller Coun cils. This leads to a better chance of civic issues 
in localities getting addressed. The scope for increased citizen participation in smaller city corporations is considerably higher. There are great examples of international cities doing very well in quality of life indicators with multiple municipalities. Some examples are London, Tokyo, Sao Paulo, Johannesburg, etc. Among the large cities, Mumbai (smaller are at 463 sqkms) and New York (very strong directly elected mayor with highly centralized power) operate with a single Corporation. Here too, in the immediate 
neighbourhood (e .g. Thane, Navi Mumbai and others for Mumbai), multiple Corporations make their 
appearance.    
Many cities have regional arrangements ( e.g. Greater London Authority for London) that centralize 
regional infrastructure provisioning allowing for local scale focus at the decentralized Corporations. This 
brings in the requisite efficiencies at the regional level, while allowing for devolution at the local level. 
                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
MULTIPLE CORPORATIONS: EXPERIENCES  
Page : 51 Further, experience elsewhere has shown that a stronger sense of community develops with smaller 
units.  
3.6 IDEAL  NUMBER  OF MUNICIPAL  CORPORATIONS  FOR  BENGALURU  
 
 
Fig 3e: Suggested 5 Municipal Corporations for Bengaluru  
The Committee did multiple iterations to decide on the ideal number of Corporations as well its physical 
boundaries. In undertaking the exercise the Committee balanced multiple parameters – population, area, 
growth rate, infrastructure availability, open spaces, demographics, etc. Options of 3, 4, 5, 6 and 8 were considered. Inputs were sought from citizens through an app that was put out on the web site. The finalised Corporation map is set out in Fig 3e. Exhibit 3 E sets out the key characteristics of these 5 
Corporations b ased on the current ward boundaries of BBMP.  The 2014 Population (#), Decadal Growth 
rate (DGR) 2001 -11, Area (sq kms) and 2014 -15 Property tax (Rs. crores including arrears) is set out 
against each of the 5 Corporations. The property tax potential is expe cted to be around twice the figure 
indi cated. Finally, this map is indicative – the actual boundarie s need to be drawn after the  Ward 

                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
MULTIPLE CORPORATIONS: EXPERIENCES  
Page : 52 delimitation exercise is completed. It is advisable at that stage to align the Corporation boundaries to the 
key arterial or main roads wherever possible.  
While 5 Corporations turn out to be the best option, it also retains  a connection with the history of 
Bengaluru. Four of the Corporations share a pillar each that Kempegowda had placed as the limits of the 
old city. The oth er Corporation is in Yelahanka where he first set base when he came to the region. In a 
way the suggested 5 Corporations signifies being ‘rooted in history, while soaring ahead  in the new 
globalised world’.  
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                          
MULTIPLE CORPORATIONS: EXPERIENCES  
Page : 53 Exhibit 3  A: General Characteris tics of the Metropolitan Regions in India   Characteristic  Mumbai  
Metropolitan 
Region  National Capital 
Territory  Kolkata  
Metropolitan 
Area  Chennai  
Metropolitan 
Region  Hyderabad  
Metropolitan 
Region  Bengaluru  
Metropolitan 
Region  DEMOGRAPHY  Population  (2011)  22494523  16787941  1555083  8856005  7749334  11658906  
Area (sq km)  4417  1483  1886.6  1189  7100  8005  
Population Density 
(people/ sq km)  5092  11320  8242  7448  1275  1457  
Decadal population 
Growth rate  2001 -11 - - 5.3 24.99  27.52  41.8  POLITICAL  
PRIMACY  No. of Lok Sabha 
Constituencies  10 7 13 6 7 5 
No. of Assembly 
Constituencies  60 70 59 37 34 36 
Units of Local 
Government  8 Municipal 
Corporations, 9 
Municipal councils, 
35 Census towns & 
964 villages.  SDMC, NDMC, East 
Delhi Municipal 
Corporation, Delhi, 
Cantonment Board  3 Municipal 
Corporations, 38 
Municipal councils, 
146 Census Towns  1 Municipal 
Corporation, 16 
Municipalities, 20 
TPs, 45 CTs, 12 
OGs, 1 
cantonment 
Board1 Municipal 
Corporation, 2 
Municipalities, 38 
CT, 44 OG, 719 TPs  1 Municipal 
corporation, 
10Municipal 
Councils, 
cantonment Board  ECONOMY  Contribution to State 
GDP  37 percent  N.A.  30.6 percent  
(2004 -105)  15 percent  13 percent  38.6 percent  
IT/ITES  
(Establishments and 
workforce)6.5 % Est. and 11.4 
% WF N.A.  2.5% Est. and 2.1 % 
WF 5.9 % Est. and 9 % 
WF 2.3 % Est.  and 10.6 
% WF 4.9 % Est. and 13.6 
% WF 
Financial  
(Establishments and 
workforce)  4.1 % 
establishments and 
8.3% workforce  N.A.  2 % establishments 
and 4.8 % workforce  2.9% 
establishments and 2.1 % 
workforce  2.1 % 
establishments and 4.1 % 
workforce  2.1 % 
establishments and 3.3 % 
workforce  
                                                                                                                                          
MULTIPLE CORPORATIONS: EXPERIENCES  
Page : 54 Characteristic  Mumbai 
Metropolitan 
Region  National Capital 
Territory  Kolkata 
Metropolitan Area  Chennai 
Metropolitan 
Region  Hyderabad 
Metropolitan 
Region  Bengaluru  
Metropolitan 
Region  
Automobile  
(Establishments and 
workforce)  4.2% 
establishments and 2.6 % workforce  N.A.  2.2% 
establishments and 1.1% 
workforce  1% 
establishments and 5.1 % 
workforce  0.7% 
establishments and 3 % workforce  0.7% 
establishments and 0.9 % 
workforce  
                                                                                                                                          
MULTIPLE CORPORATIONS: EXPERIENCES  
Page : 55 Exhibit 3 B - Infrastructure Arrangement in Metropolitan Regions  
Characteristic  Mumbai  
Metropolitan 
Region  National capital 
Territory  Kolkata  
Metropolitan 
Area  Chennai  
Metropolitan 
Region  Hyderabad  
Metropolitan 
Region  Bengaluru  
Metropolitan 
Region  WATER AND 
SEWAGE  Source 
DevelopmentMCGM, MIDC, 
CIDCO, Delhi Jal Board  KMWSA  TWAD & CMWSSB  HMWSSB,PHMED  BBMP & KUWSDB  
Treatment and 
Distribution MCGM, ULBs & MJP  ULBs  KMWSA  TWAD & CMWSSB  HMWSSB, 
PHMED, ULB  BWSSB &  
KUWSDB  
Operation and 
Management  MCGM, ULBs.  ULBs  ULB TWAD , CMWSSB & 
ULB HMWSSB & ULB  BWSSB & 
KUWSDB  SOLID  WASTE MANAGEMENT  Primary Collection  ULBs, RWAs and 
NGOs  ULBs, RWAs and 
NGOs and 
contracted to 
private Players  ULB Private Players and 
ULBs in most areas.  Sweeping opn. 
Privatized 75%. 
RWAs and ULBs 
for waste 
collection. Bengaluru  City-
66% outsourced; 
Rest BBMP, 
RWAs & SHGs  
Municipal 
Councils-
Contractors, ULBs 
and SHGs
Transportation  ULBs  ULBs  ULB Private Players and 
ULBs  ULBs  Bengaluru  City-
66% outsourced; 
Rest BBMP, 
RWAs & SHGs  
Municipal 
Councils-
Contractors, ULBs 
and SHGs
Disposal  ULBs  ULBs  ULB ULBs & Private 
players also in CMC.  ULBs, RWAs and 
Private Player  Bengaluru  City-
ULB, RWA and 
Private players  
Municipal 
Councils - ULBs  
 
                                                                                                                                          
MULTIPLE CORPORATIONS: EXPERIENCES  
Page : 56 Characteristic Mumbai
Metropolitan 
Region  National C apital 
Territory  Kolkata
Metropolitan 
Area  Chennai
Metropolitan 
Region  Hyderabad
Metropolitan 
Region  Bengaluru
Metropolitan 
Region  ENERGY  Agencies Involved  MSEB Holding Co. Ltd., 
Maharashtra State 
Electricity Distribution Co. 
Ltd. (Mahavitaran), 
Maharashtra State Power 
Generation Co. Ltd. 
Ltd. (Mahagenco) and 
Maharashtra State 
Electricity Transmission 
Co. Ltd. (Mahatransco), 
BEST Delhi Power Supply 
Company Limited, 
Delhi TRANSCO L td., 
Indraprastha Power 
Generation Company 
Limited -GENCO, BSES 
Rajdhani Power Ltd, 
BSES- Yamuna Power 
Ltd., North Delhi Power 
Ltd 
. Calcutta 
Electricity Supply 
Corporation 
Limited  DISCOMs  DISCOMs  BESCOM; KPCTL, 
KPCL  
 
Level of the 
Agency  State  State  - State Level  State Level  State level  MOBILITY  Main modes of 
Transport  Buses, Monorail and 
Local Trains.  Buses and Metro.  Buses, Trams, 
Metro Buses & Metro  Buses and MMTS  Buses, Metro  
Agencies involved  UMTA ( present & 
dysfunctional);  Delhi Transport 
Corporation, 
DMRC  - 14 agencies ( 
Central, state and 
Local)  APSRTC, GHMC  
& South Central 
Railway  BMTC, DULT, 
BMLTA, BMRCL  
Source: Governance of Megacities by Mr. K C Sivaramakrishnan; Secondary sources, In -house analysis  
 
                                                                                                                                          
MULTIPLE CORPORATIONS: EXPERIENCES  
Page : 57 Exhibit 3  C- Planning and Local Governance Structure in Metropolitan Regions  
Characteristic  Mumbai  
Metropolitan 
Region  Delhi  
Metropolitan 
Region  Kolkata  
Metropolitan 
Area  Chennai  
Metropolitan 
Region  Hyderabad  
Metropolitan 
Region  Bengaluru  
Metropolitan 
Region  PLANNING  Planning Agencies  MMRDA, ULBs & 
CIDCO, MPC  DDA, Delhi Urban 
Arts Commission, 
National Capital 
Region Planning 
Board.  KMDA & ULBs  DTCP; CMDA  HMDA  BDA, BIAAPA & 
BMRDA  
Plan implementation 
AgenciesULBs & MMRDA  DDA  KMDA & ULBs  DTCP; CMDA; 
ULBs.HMDA, GHMC and 
2 MunicipalitiesBDA, RCUDA, 8 
Zonal Planning 
Authorities & 
BMRDA
 
 
 
 
Laws  Mumbai Region and 
Town Planning Act, 
1966;  
MMRD Act, 1974; 
Maharashtra 
Metropolitan 
Planning 
Committee Act, 
1999  Delhi 
Development Act 
of 1957; National 
Capital Region 
Planning Board 
Act, 1985;  WBT&CP Ac t, 
1979; West Bengal 
Metropolitan 
planning 
committee Act, 
1994.  TN WBT&CP Ac t, 
1971; TN 
Metropolitan 
planning 
committee Act, 1 
2009.  Town & Country 
Planning Act, 1920 
amended in 1988;  
AP Urban Areas 
Development Act, 
1975;AP 
Municipalities Act, 
1994;Hyderabad 
Municipal 
Corporation Act, 
1956; HMDA Act 
2008  
 Karnataka Town & 
Country Planning 
Act, 1961; 
Bengaluru 
Metropolitan 
Region Dev 
Authority Act, 
1985; Bengaluru 
Dev. Authority Act, 
1976.  
DPCs Dysfunctional  Not Present  Present & 
Functional  Present & 
FunctionalPresent not 
functional  Present; 
Dysfunctional  
MPC  Present; 
Dysfunctional  Not Present  Present & 
Functional  Not constituted  Not constituted  Present; 
Dysfunctional  
                                                                                                                                          
MULTIPLE CORPORATIONS: EXPERIENCES  
Page : 58 Characteristic  Mumbai  
Metropolitan 
RegionDelhi  
Metropolitan 
RegionKolkata  
Metropolitan 
AreaChennai  
Metropolitan 
RegionHyderabad  
Metropolitan 
RegionBengaluru  
Metropolitan 
RegionGOVERNANCE  STRUCTURE  
 
 Multi/ Single 
Corporation System  Multi Corporation 
System  Multi Corporation 
System  Multi Corporation 
System  Single Municipal 
corporation  Single Municipal 
corporation  Single Municipal 
Corporation  
State Agency for 
Municipal 
Governance  MMRDA and Urban 
development 
Department.  Department of 
Urban 
Development  KMDA under 
Urban 
Development 
Department of 
WB.- Urban dev. Dept. 
GoAP and 
parastatal bodies  Urban dev. Dept. 
GoK and parastatal 
bodies  
Role of MLAs  and 
MPs in Municipal 
Council  No membership  MPs - voting 
members and MLAs 
-nonvoting 
members.  No membership  Non Voting 
Members.  Nonvoting 
member  Voting members  
Laws Governing the 
ULBsBPMC Act,1949; 
The MMC Act, 
1988; Maharashtra 
Municipal Councils, 
Nagar Panchayat & 
Industrial 
Townships Act, 
1965  NDMC Act, 1994. Kolkata Municipal 
Corporation Act, 
1950; West Bengal 
Municipal Act, 
1993.  TN District 
Municipal Act, 
1920; Chennai 
City Municipal 
Corporation Act, 
1919; TN WBT&CP 
Ac t, 1971.  HMC Act, 1955; 
HMDA Ac t, 2008; 
Municipalities Act, 
1994.  Karnataka 
Municipal 
Corporation Act, 
1976;  
Source: Governance of Megacities by Mr. K C Sivaramakrishnan; Secondary sources, In -house analysis  
 
 
  
 
 
                                                                                                                                          
MULTIPLE CORPORATIONS: EXPERIENCES  
Page : 59 Exhibit 3  D- Agencies other than Local Government Authorities in Metrop olitan Regions  
Characteristic  Mumbai  
Metropolitan 
Region  National Capital 
Territory  Kolkata  
Metropolitan 
Area  Chennai  
Metropolitan 
Region  Hyderabad  
Metropolitan 
Region  Bengaluru  
Metropolitan 
Region   
WATER & SEWAGE  Parastatal  MIDC & MJP  Dal Jal Board  KMWSA  TWAD & CMWSSB  HMWSSB  BWSSB; KUWSDB.  
Level  State  State  State  State  State State  
Laws  MIDC Act, 1961; 
Maharashtra 
water Supply and 
Sewerage Act, 
1976.  Delhi Jal Board Act, 
1998  Calcutta 
Metropolitan 
Water and 
Sanitation 
Authority Act, 
1966  Chennai 
Metropolitan 
Water Supply & 
Sewerage Act, 
1978; TNWSDB Act, 
1970  HMWSSB  Act, 1989  BWSSB Act, 1964;  
KUWSDB, 1973.   
TRANSPORT  Parastatal  Mumbai Railway 
Vikas Corporation  Delhi Transport 
Corporation, DMRC.  KIT, KMRCL, CTC, 
etc. 14 agencies  APRTC, AP State 
Highways Authority KKSRTC; BMTC; 
BMLTA  
MSRDC, MSRTC, 
RTA., BEST  
Level  Centre; State  State -Centre  State  Centre, state and 
Local Government  State State  
Laws  Multiple  Multiple  Multiple  - State owned 
Corporation  Road Transport Act, 
1950; BMLTA 
constituted by GO   
ELECTRICITY  Parastatal  MSEB Holding Co. Ltd., 
Maharashtra State 
Electricity Distribution 
Co. Ltd. (Mahavitaran), 
Maharashtra State 
Power Generation Co. 
Ltd. (Mahagenco) and 
Maharashtra State 
Electricity Transmission Co. Ltd. ( Mahatransco) , 
BEST  Delhi Power Supply 
Company Limited, 
Delhi TRANSCO Ltd., 
Indraprastha Power 
Generation Company 
Limited - GENCO, 
BSES Rajdhani Power 
Ltd, BSES - Yamuna 
Power Ltd., North 
Delhi Power Ltd.  Calcutta Electricity 
Supply Corporation 
Limited  TNEB, EDCO/ TANT 
RANSCO, TNERC,  CPDCL ; A P 
Transmission Corporation  Karnataka Power 
Corporation Limited;  
BESCOM.  
                                                                                                                                          
MULTIPLE CORPORATIONS: EXPERIENCES  
Page : 60 Characteristic  Mumbai  
Metropolitan 
RegionNational Capital 
Territory  Kolkata  
Metropolitan 
AreaChennai  
Metropolitan 
RegionHyderabad  
Metropolitan 
RegionBengaluru  
Metropolitan 
Region
Level  State  State  State  State Level  State State  
Laws  Electricity Act, 
2003  Delhi Electricity 
Reform Act, 2000 and 
Electricity Act, 2003  Electricity supply 
act, 1948  Electricity Act, 
2003; The 
Electricity 
Regulatory 
Commission Act, 
1988.  AP electricity 
Reform Act, 1989; 
State Owned 
Organization Karnataka Electricity 
Reform Act, 1999.   
HOUSINGParastatal  Maharashtra  
Housing and Area 
Development 
AuthorityDelhi Urban Shelter 
Improvement Board, 
DDA  West Bengal 
Housing Board  TNHB; TNSCB.  AP Housing Board  Karnataka Housing 
Board; Karnataka 
Sum Development 
Board
Level  State  State -Centre  State  Parastatal  State State  
Laws  
 
 
 
 
 MHAD Act,  1976  DUSIB Act, 2010; 
Delhi Development 
Act of 1957West Bengal 
Housing Board act, 
1972  Madras State 
Housing Board Act, 
1961; TN Slum Area 
(Improvement & 
Clearance)Act, 171.  AP Housing Board 
Act, 1956  Karnataka Housing 
Board Act, 1962; 
Karnataka Slum 
Impr ovement & 
Clearance Act, 1973   
CITY  DEVELOPMENT  Parastatal  MMRDA, City & 
Industrial development 
Corporation of 
MH, Directorate of 
Town Planning.  DDA, NCRPB  KMDA; ULBs, 
KMPCCMDA, ULBs & MPC  APIIDC; HGCL; 
HMDA; QuilQutb
Shah UDA, Special 
Development Authorities 
constituted under 
UAD Act, 1975 
designated as 
functional units.  KUIDFC; 
BMRDA;BDA
Level  State  State -Centre  State  State  State State  
                                                                                                                                          
MULTIPLE CORPORATIONS: EXPERIENCES  
Page : 61 Characteristic  Mumbai  
Metropolitan 
RegionNational Capital 
Territory  Kolkata  
Metropolitan 
AreaChennai  
Metropolitan 
RegionHyderabad  
Metropolitan 
RegionBengaluru  
Metropolitan 
Region
Laws  MMRD Act, 1974; 
Mumbai Region 
and Town 
Planning Act, 
1966;  Delhi Development 
Act of 1957; 
National Capital 
Region Planning 
Board Act, 1985  KMC Act, 1980; 
Howrah Municipal 
Corporation Act, 
1980; Chandan 
Nagar Municipal 
Corporation Act, 
1990; West Bengal 
Municipal 
Act,1993; WBT&CP 
Ac t, 1979; West 
Bengal 
Metropolitan 
plan ning 
committee 
act,1994.  TN District 
Municipal Act, 
1920; Chennai City 
Municipal 
Corporation Act, 
1919; TN WBT&CP 
Ac t, 1971; TN 
Metropolitan 
planning 
committee Act, 1 
2009.  State level  
organization; 
Companies Act 
1956; HMDA Act, 
2008  Registered under 
Companies act, 
1953; BMRDA Act, 
1953; BDA Act, 1976.  ENVIRONMENT  Parastatal  Maharashtra 
Pollution Control 
BoardDelhi Pollution 
Control Committee & 
Central pollution 
Control  Board  WBPCB, WBBB, 
EKWMA, 
WBSCZMA.TN Pollution 
Control Board; 
Chennai River 
Restoration Trust.  AP Pollution Control 
Board  LDA; KSPCB.  
Level  State  State -Centre  State  State  State State  
Laws  Water ( Protection 
& control of 
pollution) Act, 
1974  Water (Protection & 
control of pollution) 
Act, 1974, Air 
(Prevention and 
Control of pollution) 
Act and Govt. 
Notification 
B12015/7/92 -AS. Water (Protection 
& control of 
pollution) Act, 
1974.  Water (Protection 
& control of 
pollution) Act, 
1974.  Water ( Protection 
& control of 
pollution) Act, 1974  Registered under 
Karnataka State 
Societies 
Registration Act, 
1960; Water 
(Protection & 
control of pollution) 
Act, 1974.  
Source: Governance of Megacities by Mr. K C Sivaramakrishnan; Secondary sources, In -house analysis  
                                                                                                                                          MULTIPLE CORPORATIONS: EXPERIENCES  
Page : 62 Exhibit 3  E -Characteristics of the suggested 5 Corporation  
 
Corporation 
No. Assembly Constituencies Ward Numbers  
1 (North)  Byatarayanapura, Yelahanka, 
Dasarahalli, Yeshwantpura, 
Rajarajeswari Nagar.  5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 16, 38, 41, 71, 70, 40, 39, 
14, 12, 13, 15, 11, 3, 9, 4, 2, 1  
2 (Central)  Hebbal, Pulakeshi Nagar (SC ), Shivaji 
Nagar, Gandhi Nagar , Rajarajeswari 
Nagar, Mahalakshmi Layout, Rajaji 
Nagar , Malleshwaram.  69, 74, 102, 101, 100, 107, 108, 121, 
120, 94, 109, 110, 91, 78, 60, 31, 32, 
22, 21, 20, 19, 18, 35, 36, 17, 37, 44, 
42, 43, 68, 67, 99,  75, 66, 45, 34, 33, 
46, 47, 48, 61, 62, 63, 92, 93, 64, 77, 
65, 76, 98, 97, 95, 96  
3 (West)  Rajarajeswari Nagar, Govindaraja 
Nagar, Vijaya Nagar, Chamarajpet, 
Chickpet, Basavanagudi, Padmanaba 
Nagar, Bengaluru  South, 
Yeshwantpura . 118, 119, 139, 140, 142 , 154, 167, 166, 
180, 185, 197, 195, 196, 198, 159, 130, 
72, 129, 73, 103, 127, 128, 160, 184, 
181, 182, 165, 183, 163, 162, 161, 158, 
131, 132, 126, 125, 104, 105, 106, 123, 
122, 124, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 
141, 157, 156, 155, 164
4 (South)  Shanth i Nagar, BommanaHalli, 
Bengaluru  South, Jaya Nagar, 
Chickpet, B.T.M. Layout. 111, 114, 89, 112, 174, 190, 191, 192, 
194, 193, 188, 187, 186, 189, 175, 173, 
172, 177, 178, 179, 168, 176, 171, 170, 
152, 151, 148, 147, 115, 116, 117, 145, 
146, 153, 143, 144, 169 
5 (East)  K.R. Puram, Mahadevapura, C.V. 
Ramannagar (SC), Sarvagna Nagar, 
Shivaji Nagar.  90, 79, 59, 49, 30, 23, 24, 25, 54, 26, 
52, 53, 83, 84, 149, 150, 87, 86, 85, 82, 
81, 55, 51, 50, 27, 29, 28, 57, 56, 58, 
80, 88, 113  
Total  27 198 
       …… contd  
 
  
 
  
 
                                                                                                                                          MULTIPLE CORPORATIONS: EXPERIENCES  
Page : 63 Parameters  Corpn 1  Corpn 2  Corpn 3  Corpn 4  Corpn 5  Total  
Population 
2,011#  1,139,035  1,948,517  2,182,475  1,583,352  1,590,296  8,443,675  
Population 
decadal growth 
% 103  15 43 44 66 45 
Area (sq km)  150.5  71.1  157.2  118.7  211.6  709.1  
Population 
density 2,011 
#/(sq.km)  7,568  27,405  13,883  13,339  7,515  11,907  
Buildings 2,014#  206,820  200,833  309,205  223,589  256,717  1,197,164  
> G+3/Buildings  
% 6 13 10 14 9 11 
Plinth Area (%)  15 36 20 22 16 20 
HH Census 2,011 
# 293,251  469,055  537,806  397,429  404,290  2,101,831  
Decadal HH 
growth (%)  119  26 56 63 88 61 
Est Builtup area 
2,014 (sq km)  46.68  60.9  72.34  69.34  82.23  331.49  
2,014 -15 
Property tax (Rs. 
crores)  213.6  369.9  278.6  456.1  429.4  1,747.60  
Road length 
(kms)/Area 
(Sq.Kms)  16.7  25.4  23.7  19.7  14.7  19 
DWCC 2,014 #  20 51 56 37 32 196  
Lake area (sq m)  6,524,073  630,735  2,711,799  4,305,563  11,176,935  25,349,105
Parks 2,014#  323  380  923  451  300  2,377  
Park area (sq m)  1,391,203  4,159,839  3,470,363  2,828,649  1,565,092  13,415,146
Playgrounds #  44 106  127  76 37 390  
Playground area (sq m)  385,376  620,082  632,986  757,266  205,124  2,600,834  
Open spaces 
(Lake + Park + 
Playground)/Are
a  %  4.85  2.63  2.53  4.9 5.48   4.31  
 
Govt Schools #  113  145  158  116  152  684  
Police stations #  14 31 22 18 18 103  
Fire stations #  2 2 3 2 3 12 
Bus stops #  663  747  1,068  731  765  3,974  
Street lights #  59,458  89,873  120,520  73,691  77,571  421,113  
                                                                                                                                          MULTIPLE CORPORATIONS: EXPERIENCES  
Page : 64 Parameters  Corpn 1  Corpn 2  Corpn 3  Corpn 4  Corpn 5  Total  
2,011 HHs with 
Tubewells (%)  29.8  5.5 11.4  12.6  22.1  14.9  
2,011 HHs with 
UGD (%)  56.4  95.4  87.9  86.3  58.4  79.2  
2,011 HHs with 
Piped water 
supply (%)45.7  88.1  79 72.5  58.5  71.2  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 65 4 A  THREE -TIER  GOVERNANCE  FRAMEWORK  FOR  BENGALURU  
The current governance system in Bengaluru of having a single corporation (BBMP) for an area of 709.5  
sq.km and populatio n of over 10 million is unsustainable. Hence we propose to have multiple Municipal 
Corporations  to govern Bengaluru for better adminis tration and to ensure that the M unicipal government 
is closer and more accountable to the people. However, a divi sion of t he BBMP into multiple Municipal 
Corporations in itself is not sufficient to achieve a more effective and accountable M unicipal gover nment.  
A system with multiple Municipal C orporations can work effectively only if we provide for a new three -
tier governanc e framework, which would include an integrated governance layer above the Municipal 
Corporations level as well as greater devolut ion of powers to the tier of M unicipal governance closest to 
the people, the wards. This framework needs to be provided under a new law for governing Bengaluru 
which will establish a three -tier city governance framework with Wards at the basic level, a set of 
Municipal Corporations in the middle layer and a Greater Bengaluru Authority at the top.  
The following sections of this ch apter  lay out the institutional architecture of e ach of these tiers. Each 
section  examines the current law in place, the various institutional choices for reform and proposes the 
most feasible and effective option for Bengaluru.  Starting from the lowest u nit, the first section  examines 
how, at the 3rd Tier, a more representative Ward Committee with wider powers can play a vital role in city  
governance.  The second section  explains how the institutions at the 2nd Tier need to be reformed by 
having a stronge r Mayor, instituting Zonal Committees and reducing the role of Stand ing Committees. The 
final section  proposes the creation of an upper tier of governance called the Greater Bengaluru Authority 
which will c oordinate the functions of the Municipal C orporati ons and integrate parastatal agencies 
within its structure to ensure better governance for Bengaluru.  
4.1 TIER  3: WARD  LEVEL  GOVERNANCE  
 
The 74th Constitutional Amendment sets out the general principles to create viable institutions of self-
government.  For large metropolitan entities like Bengaluru, this means a representative multi -tiered 
municipal government with political representation and administrative capacity. The 
constitutionalization of the third tier of government is designed to create representativ e units of 
government that are relatively immune to outside interference by authorities – both social and political. 
The spirit of self -governance requires that these municipalities and their constituent units must have the 
administrative capacity and poli tical ability to carry out the everyday tasks of governance in a sustained 
manner.  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 66 Many of the daily problems confronted by citizens are local and can be solved at the lowest level of 
government if they are sufficiently empowered to do the same. Hence making the Ward the basic unit of governance and empowering Ward Committees shall be a fundamental part of any exercise to restructure Bengaluru’s governance system. The 74
th Amendment also provides for the formation of Ward 
Committees below the Municipal Corporation  to ensure that responsibilities within the ward are 
effectively carried out by a body closer to the people. We hence propose a three- tier governance 
framework for Bengaluru in which the third tier - at the level of the Wards - is provided with sufficient 
powers to become an effective and accountable institution of governance.  
This section  analyzes and makes proposals on the composition of Ward Committees, its powers and 
functions, and structure of ward administration and decision making process es at the Ward.  It identifies 
the weaknesses in the current law (that was drafted before the 74th Amendment  was passed) as well as 
institutions created in its wake to propose reforms that draw on various alternatives from other parts o f 
India and abroad.  This section  is divided into 3 Parts. Part 1 reviews and makes suggestions for reform on 
the composition of Ward Committees. Part 2 considers the powers and functions of ward committees and emphasizes the need for Ward Committees to be vested with greater  planning, administrative and finance 
powers. Part 3 briefly examines how ward administration and decision making processes are presently structured and proposes ways to improve them.  
4.2 COMPOSITION  OF WARD  COMMITTEES  
4.2.1 Current Set up and Challenges  
The 74th Constitutional Amendment provides that for larger municipalities with a population of 3 lakhs 
or more, Ward Committees, consisting of one or more wards shall  be constituted to advance the 
principle of self -government.1 Article 243 -S of the Constitution further provides that the State 
Legislatures may make laws regarding the composition of the Ward Committees and the manner in which positions on the committee may be filled. Yet, despite the 74
th Constitutional Amendment and 
state legislations, Ward Committees were not constituted or functional in many states for most periods of time during the last two decades. The Central Government sought to remedy the sporadic 
implementation of Ward Committees and Area Sabhas through its urban development programme, the 
Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM), in 2005. State governments were 
required to enact a Community Participation Law as a condition to receiving funds under the JNNURM.  
                                                             
1Article 243S(1), Constitution of India  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 67 In Karnataka, the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act (the “KMC Act”) was amended in 2011 
through the Karnataka Municipal Corporations (Amendment) Act 2011.  The amendments were model led on the Community Participation Law or the Mode l Nagar Raj Bill circulated by the C entral 
government that requires the establishment o f a three tier structure of city governance consisting of 
Municipal Councils, Ward Committees and Area Sabhas. The stated objectives of the amendments t o 
the KMC Act were:  
•The constitution of A rea Sabhas and Ward Committees  
•Entrusting functions and duties to the Area  Sabhas and Ward Committees and  
•Institutionalizing citizen participation.  
Despite the amendment to the KMC Act in 2011, Ward Committees and Area Sabhas in Karnataka are yet to find their place as institutions of vibrant self -governance and aut onomy. Ward committees were 
constituted in Bengaluru in 2013. However, despite the statutory mandate of meeting every month , 
Ward Committee meetings were not conducted in Bengaluru. Hence, we have no empirical basis to evaluate the working of these provisi ons.  However, when one considers that Ward Committees are 
expected to become the primary unit of municipal self -government, it is crucial to revisit the existing 
statutory framework, consider various other models and suggestions from civil society before we 
propose significant reform.   
Section 13H of the KMC Act provides for the constitution of Ward Committees for each ward in the 
Corporation. Karnataka chose a model of composition that placed great emphasis on the role of the 
Councillor representing the ward who is the Chairperson of the Ward Committee and the remaining 10 members are to be nominated by the Corporation. Of the 10 nominated members, 2 are to be drawn 
from Schedules Castes/Schedules Tribes, 3 from Women and 2 from Residents Associations.  
The institutionalization of Ward Committees in Bengaluru has faced two serious challenges - first, the 
Ward Committee Rules, 2013 have been subject to repeated judicial challenges before the High Court 
and are yet to be notified. The latest draft of May 26
th 2015 continues to persist with a Councillor -
centered Ward Committee that does not have the institutional ability to be the locus of ward level governance. Secondly, the appointment of Ward Committee members in 2013 by the nomination of the Corporation see med to be designed to entrench the power of the Councillor as a majority of nominees 
were seen to be those that the Councillors informally approved of rather than the most vibrant and responsive citizen s of the ward. These challenges to the current legal and policy approach to the Ward 
Committee requires us to develop clarity about the principle of representation of the Ward Committee 
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 68 and the powers and functions that it must exercise. Before we turn to the proposals for reform it is 
useful to briefly surve y some  practices in other parts of India.  
4.2.2 Ward Committee Composition in other Jurisdictions  
 
Kerala : Kerala is often represented  as a state with effective  local government institutions , including  
Ward Committees. The Kerala Municipality Act, 1994, which governs Municipal Corporations, 
Municipal Councils and Town Panchayats, establishes a Ward Committee to be a large body of over 50 
members representing a wide range of stakeholders and interest gro ups in the ward area who are 
selected or elected in an indirect manner.2 Apart from the Councillor of the Ward, the Ward Committee 
includes members of residents associations, neighbourhood groups, political parties, educational institutions and trade unions. The emphasis in this approach is to ensure that a wide range of voices 
are heard at the Ward Committee with an intricate balance between indirectly elected representative 
members and members nominated by the Councillor.  
West Bengal : West Bengal constitu tes the Ward Committee in a completely different manner. Section 
23 of The West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993 provides the state government with powers to decide the 
composition and functions of the Ward Committee. Accordingly, Rule 4 of the West Bengal Munic ipal 
(Ward Committee) Rules 2001 provides that the Ward Committee shall consist of the elected  Councillor “and such other members as may be nominated by the elected Councillor of the ward and 
the Municipality/ Notified Area Authority from among the residents of the ward.” Apart from the 
Chairman, the Ward Committee consists of a minimum of 9 and a maximum of 17 members to be nominated by the Councillor and the Municipality from among the residents of the ward. The number of other members shall be nine for a population of up to 2,500, with an additional member for every 500 additional persons, subject to a maximum of 17 members. The Rules also provide for 
                                                             
2Section 43 Kerala Municipality Act, 1994 provides that:
• Fifteen persons to be elected in the manner prescribed, from among the members of the resident's association of that 
Ward, which are registered in the Municipality; 
• Twenty members to be elected in t he manner prescribed from among the members of the registered neighbourhood 
groups of that Ward which are registered in the Municipality; 
• One person each nominated by every political party having representation in the Municipality; 
• The Heads of all recog nised educational institutions functioning in that Ward; 
• Twenty persons nominated jointly by the Chairperson and Councillor of the Ward, of whom, —
(i) Ten shall be from persons representing cultural organisations, voluntary  organisations, educational instit utions 
and industrial -commercial establishments functioning in that  ward; 
(ii) Five shall be from persons representing those working in that ward as professionals (experts  in agriculture, industry, health, education, engineering etc.); and 
(iii) Five shall be from persons in registered trade unions.  Provided that, the members nominated under items (i) and (ii) need not be the residents of that ward 
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 69 representation from Community Development Societies and from among women members of Below 
Poverty Line f amilies residing in the area. Other members shall be considered from among the 
professionals, social workers, cultural activists residing in that area.  
Hyderabad : The third model of constituting Ward Committees in Hyderabad goes beyond the indirect 
electi on and nomination process in Kerala and the entirely nominated Kolkata model to create a Ward 
Committee comprised of Area Sabha representatives as well as nominees from civil society. As per 
Section 8 -A of the Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation Act, 1955, along with the councillor of the 
ward, each Ward Committee shall consist of:  
•Not more than ten members representing civil society groups from the Ward, to be nominated 
by the Municipal Corporation in such manner as may be prescribed; and  
•The Area Sabha Representatives.  
The Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation (Constitution, Conduct of Meetings, Powers & Functions of Ward Committees and Area Sabha) Rules, 2010 further provides for the manner in which 
members from civil society and Area Sabha are to be selected. The Rules provide for the Commissioner 
of GHMC to issue notice inviting applications from the representatives of civil society and any other 
prominent citizens of the Wards concerned, for nomination as members of the Ward Committees as 
well as  Area Sabha representatives.
3 
Model Nagara Raj Bill : The Hyderabad model of having Ward Committees constituted by a 
combination of Area Sabha Representatives and nominees from civil society is partly based on the 
Model Nagar Raj Bill that was published by the Union Urban Develo pment ministry under JNNURM. 
This Bill was the model law circulated by the central government to help states pass the Community 
Participation Law which is a requirement under JNNURM. It also provides for a maximum of ten 
                                                             
3The 10 members representing civil society were classified into the following categories by prescribing the minimum seats to 
be filled in each. 
• President / Secretary representing registered Residents Welfare Associations in the ward. In the event of non -
availability of President / Secretary from the Residents Welfare Association, a member of registered Tax Payers/Rate 
Payers association in the ward. (Minimum 2 members)
• President/Secretary of the slum level federation (i.e. NHC). In case of non -availability of a slum level federation in a 
ward, a representative of the senior -most self -help group in the ward. (Minimum 2 members)
• A member of[ a registered association / Institution / body or organization or NGO or Mahila Mandali or Trade Union/Chamber of Commerce / Medical Council in the ward. (Minimum 1 member)
• A member of a registered voluntary organization / NGO in the ward working for the welfare of the community. (Minimum 1 member)
• Any prominent citizen of the ward. (Minimum 1 member)
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 70 members repre senting the civil society to be nominated by the municipality, provided that at least 
two-thirds of members of the Ward Committee are Area Sabha Representatives.  
The Nagara Raj Bill prepared by Lok Raj Andolan, a movement associated with Arvind Kejriw al’s 
earlier NGO Parivartan, also has provisions stating that  “all mohalla sabha representatives of the 
mohallas falling under such ward” shall be members of the Ward Committee. In its submission before 
this Committee, CIVIC Bangalore, an active civil society group ,proposed  a mixed model of direct 
election coupled with nomination . It suggested that the Ward Committee should consist of 10 directly -
elected members from geographical sub -units of the ward (or neighbourhood sabhas ) which includes 
2-3 contiguous polling booth areas declared as a neighbourhood (1 Neighbourhood Area 
Representative for ca. 3,000 population). Further 10 members may be nominated to represent civic associations, RWAs, development organizations, labour uni ons, business associations, women, youth, 
faith -based, cultural and educational institutions etc. in the ward. These nominations should be the 
result of internal elections within these organizations or through a publicly advertised invitation for 
applicati ons followed by a selection through a committee of eminent citizens.  
4.2.3 Ward Committee Recommendation  
In order to create a representative Ward Committee with close connections to the residents  of the 
Ward, we propose a mixed model of representation for the Ward Committee with direct election 
through proportional representation that reflects the party vote share in the municipal elections along with nominated members. Proportional representation  is internationally attributed as a system of 
democratic representation that reflects the voting preferences of an electorate more closely than any other system. We are of the opinion that such a model of representation would be effective and feasible for a multi -member representative institution like the Ward Committee.  By integrating the 
election of the Councillor with that of the Ward Committee, the cost and administrative effort to 
organize separate elections can also be avoid ed. Along with elected members, including a set of 
nominated members from the civil society actively working for the welfare of the Ward through Resident Welfare Associations, Community Based Organisations, Slum Federations etc. in the Ward Committee would make it vibrant institutions of governance. The Area Sabha representatives and 
officials dealing with the affairs of the wards can be invitees to the Ward Committee meetings.  
Based on the above discussion, the following provisions can be introduced either as an amendment to 
the K MC Act or as part of a new legislation for the Greater Bengaluru Authority. 
  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 71 Composition of the Ward Committee :  
(1)The Ward Committee shall consist of the following, namely:-  
(a) the Councillor of the Corporation representing the Ward, who shall be the Chairperson of 
the Ward Committee;  
(b) a maximum of 20 members to be nominated by the Corporation; out of which  
i)a maximum of 10 members would be selected based on proportional representation, 
as specified in the procedure laid down in this Ac t. 
ii)a minimum of 10 members would be nominated from the civil society of the ward, as 
specified in the procedure laid down in this Act.  
(2) Any person disqualified from being elected as a Councilor shall not be nominated as member of the Ward Committee.  
(3) All Area Sabha Representatives falling within the jurisdiction of the Ward shall be i nvitees  to 
the meetings of the  Ward Committee.  
(4) All the Ward -level officers of the Corporation  and parastatals agencies involved in service 
delivery in the ward shall be inviteesto the meetings of the Ward Committee  
Procedure for selecting ward committee members by proportional representation : 
(1) Every candidate  contesting the elections to the Municipal Corporation shall, on or before the 
last date of filing  nominations, declare a List of R epresentatives for the ward  in w hich he/she is  
contesting elections  
(2) Each List of Representatives should contain the n ames of a maximum of 10 and a minimum of 
3 potential ward committee members  from the ward, listed in t he order of preference.  
Provided that among the top 3 names provided in each list, there shall be a minimum of 1 woman 
and 1 member from the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.  
Provided further that any candidate who has filed his/her nomination for  contesting the election 
shall not be  in the list of representatives for the ward committee  
(4) The list of representatives of each candidate  shall be widely publicized and should be 
prominently displayed in the ward offices and polling booths.  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 72 (5) The members to the ward committee selected for proportional representation shall be filled i n 
such a manner that every candidate who receives 10 percentage of the total votes polled in the 
ward shall have one member and each additional 10 percentage of total votes polled shall constitute one additional member filled on the basis of the order of preference in the list of representatives for each party 
Provided that if the total number of members selected through this process is less than 10, the winning councill or may nominate the members of his/her choice to fill the unallocated seats  
Procedure for selecting ward committee members representing civil society : 
(1) A call for applications for membership to the Ward Committee must be made by the Zonal Commissioner within one month of the completion of elections to the Municipal Corporation.  
(2) The call for applications and details regarding the eligibility requirements for civil society 
members must be widely circulated and shall be pasted on the notice board of wa rd offices and 
shall also be published in two dailies with wide circulation, including one in the regional 
language.  
(3) The ward committee members representing civil society shall be nominated by a Selection Committee consisting of  
(i) Councillor of the War d,  
(ii)Two members with experience in engaging with civic issues of the ward, nominated by the 
Zonal Commissioner, at least one of them belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes  
or Woman  
(iii)One member with experience in engaging with civic issues of the wa rd, nominated by the 
Member of Legislative Assembly under whose jurisdiction the ward is located in  
 
(4) The Selection Committee shall nominate members representing civil society in such a manner 
that it includes:  
(i) 3 members from Residents Welfare Associations having their registered offices 
located within the jurisdiction of that ward;  
(ii) 2 members from voluntary organizations, civil society organizations, community based organizations, non -governmental organizations, women’s organizations, 
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 73 environmental organizations, cultural organizations, youth organizations and other 
similar groups actively working in the ward.  
(iii) 2 members from slum associations/federations and organizations and self-help 
groups working among people from economically weaker sections in the ward.  
(iv) 2 members from trade  unions, workers groups, trade  associations, industrial 
associations, chambers of commerce, professionals groups, educational societies and other sectors working in the ward. 
(v) 1 member who is a social activist, social worker, community worker, RTI activist, consumer activist, former bureaucrat, former judge or any other citizen who has been actively working for social welfare in the ward.  
Provided that a mong the members nominated, there shall be at least two members belonging 
to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and three  members who are women.  
4.3 POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OFWARD COMMITTEE
4.3.1 Current Set up and Challenges  
A representative and empowered Ward Committee would have the legitimacy to be an effective check on the powers of the Councillor and make the Corporation accountable. However, currently Section 
13H of the KMC Act sets out that Ward Committees shall discharge only limited planning and 
super visory functions and have no accountability functions. The planning provisions are primarily to 
prepare and submit a Ward Development Scheme to the corporation for allotment of funds. The Ward Committee’s supervisory provisions include the responsibility t o supervise all programmes and 
schemes being implemented by the Corporation in the ward, ensure timely collection of taxes, ensure 
water supply maintenance in the ward and finalize location of new public taps and public wells, ensure 
sewerage system maintenance in the ward, ensure proper solid waste management and sanitation work in the ward and finalize location of new public sanitation units as well as to ensure proper 
utilization of the funds allotted under ward development scheme in the ward.
4 
                                                             
4Other responsibilities include the approval the list of beneficiaries for beneficiary oriented schemes of the 
Corporation submitted by Area Sabhas falling under that ward, scrutinize list of ineligible beneficiaries submitted 
by the Area Sabhas and submit it to the Corporation, , ensure maintenance of street lighting in the ward and finalize location of new street ligh t, ensure maintenance of parks, open spaces, greening of area in the ward, ensure 
afforestation, and implementation of rain water harvesting schemes, mobilize voluntary labour and donation by way of goods or money for implementation of Ward Development Sch eme and various programmes and schemes 
of Corporation, inform the Corporation regarding any encroachment of land belonging to the Corporation and  
perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Corporation as per its bye -laws
.
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 74 While the present provision lays down the functions of the Ward Committee, it does not confer Ward 
Committees with specific powers commensurate to their functions. To make Ward Committees effective institutions of governance, it would be necessary to empower them with such powers. Below we discuss some examples of the powers conferred on Ward Committees in the provisions regarding 
ward committees in other states  and in model legislations .  
4.3.2 Powers and Functio ns of Ward Committees in other scenarios  
Model Nag ar Raj Bill : The Model Nagar Raj Bill proposed that Ward Committees should be provided 
with adequate planning and finance powers. The planning powers include the power to obtain full information about the District and Municipal government and to be consulted in the development of land use and zoning regulations within its jurisdiction. The financial powers were more extensive and include the power to obtain the full Municipal Budget and suggest changes to it, obtain the requisite financial and administrativ e support from the Municipality in managing Bank accounts, obtain full 
details on all revenue items including taxes and budgetary allocations and retain up to 50% of the Ward Revenues for local development until a predefined minimum level based on a Ward 
Infrastructure I ndex has been created.   
To facilitate the proper preparation of the budget, the Model Nagaraja Bill provides that a Ward 
Committee meeting shall compulsorily be held at least three weeks before the preparation of the Ward Budget. As per Section 16 of the Model Nagara Raj Bill, the Ward Committee shall be responsible for the preparation of annual ward budget. A Ward Finance Committee is required to prepare the annual 
budget for the Ward and place it before the meeting of the Ward Committee wh ich will deliberate 
upon and approve the budget. The Ward Finance Committee shall also maintain ward -level bank 
accounts for all the receipts and expenditure activities of the ward and also prepare a quarterly report 
of the financial transactions of the Ward Committee. The Bill further provides that a ll reports 
presented by the Ward Finance Committee for the past year shall be discussed by the Ward 
Committee. The Ward Committee shall also ensure that the budget calendar is strictly adhered to and 
prepare th e budget for its ward at least 6 weeks before the Municipal budget. The Municipality may 
suggest changes that may be incorporated into the Ward level Budget after discussion with the Ward 
Committee.  
West Bengal Model : Ward Committees in the West Bengal Municipality are equipped with wide 
planning and administrative and supervisory powers.  
Planning Powers:  Rule 11 of the West Bengal Municipal (Ward Committee) Rules 2001 provides that 
within three months from the date of its constitution, the Ward Committee shall prepare a list of the 
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 75 schemes for development of the ward during the next five years and also the annual priority list of 
these schemes and submit the same to the Municipality for incorporating them in the Development Plan of the Municipality. The priority list shall be prepared after identifying problems of the ward, and 
fixation of priority of prob lems so identified.  
Supervisory Powers:  West Bengal’s Ward Committee Rules also provide that the Ward Committee may 
require, with the permission of the Municipality, any officer of the Municipality to attend any meeting 
of the Committee at which any matter  dealt with by such officer in the course of his duties is being 
discussed. The Ward Committee Chairman has the power to call for any information from the 
Municipal Corporation regarding any matter relating the ward and to call for all periodical statement s 
relating to receipts and disbursements. When the Municipality executes any development scheme in the ward area, a Beneficiary Committee consisting of the citizens of the ward, shall be constituted by 
the Ward Committee, under its supervision, for oversee ing and making any suggestions on the work 
concerned. The Ward Committee shall make the work schedule of any development scheme available 
to the Beneficiary Committee.  
Civil Society Suggestions : The Nagara Raj Bill of Lokraj Andolan proposes the creation of a Ward 
Committee with wide supervisory and administrative powers. It provides the Ward committee with 
the power to seek any information from any officer of the State Government or Municipality related to 
the functioning of their ward.  The Ward Committe e is also empowered to summon any officer who is 
related to the functioning of any activity in that ward to the ward committee meetings.  The Bill also 
provides that any authority responsible for preparing the master plan shall call for the views of all ward committees before finalizing any master plans and zonal plans. It also provides that transfers, 
disciplinary matters and salaries of employees who get transferred to the ward shall be directly handled by the Ward Committee.  
In its submission to the Com mittee, CIVIC Bangalore, suggested that for planning, the Ward 
Committees should be asked to prepare a 5 -year ward vision plan as per a Performance Management 
System (PMS) based on human development and social infrastructure outcomes at the ward level.  They also recommended that Ward Committees be granted administrative powers to impose financial 
penalties on government officials with whose functioning the Ward Committee is dissatisfied.  CIVIC further suggested that Ward Committees be granted the executive power to terminate contracts, such 
as garbage and road contracts, if the contractors fail to perform properly and also the power to give 
their opinion on those projects which require environmental clearances, public hearings, land 
acquisitions, privatization of services, d isplacement of residents, etc.  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 76 4.3.3 Recommendation  for Ward Committee functions 
While the KMC Act lays down certain functions for the Ward Committee, it does not confer specific 
powers on them. To make Ward Committees effective institutions of governance, it would be necessary to empower them with specific planning powers, financial and budgetary powers and administrati ve, supervisory and auditing powers.   
Planning Powers and Functions  
To ensure that the Ward becomes a basic unit of governance, it needs to be vested with certain powers 
in the planning process. Taking the above discussion into consideration, the proposed  legislation on 
the Greater Bengaluru Authority or an amendment to the KMC Act shall provide the Ward Committee with the following powers and functions related to planning:  
a.Ward Committees shall, through a wide ranging consultation process involving citizens of the Ward, provide inputs for a 5 year Ward Vision Plan and submit it to the Municipal 
Corporation  
b.Ward Committees shall provide inputs to  submit to the Municipal Corporation an Annual 
Ward Development Plan, in the form of a priority list, specifying the projects and schemes 
which the Ward proposes to implement in the following financial year  
c.The Municipal Corporation shall take into consideration all plans submitted by Ward Committees in preparing its plans, programmes and schemes  
d.Ward Committees shall be provided full information about Master Plans, Development Plans or any other municipal plans that affect a ward and shall have the right to verify, seek 
clarifications and suggest changes that need to be incorporated;  
e.No change in the land use and zoning shall be carried out by any authority without consulting the Ward Committees of the affected area.  
Budgetary Powers and Functions   
The KMC Act has not given the Ward Committee sufficient budgeting and financing powers that allow 
them to carry out their functions. To enable Ward Committees to become effective institutions of governance, the proposed legislation on the Greater Bengaluru Auth ority or an amendment to the KMC 
Act shall provide it with the following powers and functions related to budgeting: 
a.Ward Committees will provide inputs to prepare a Ward Budget in accordance with Annual Ward Development Plan and submit it to the Municipal Corporation which may incorporate 
it to the Budget of the Municipal Corporation  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 77 b.Ward C ommittees shall prepare their Ward Budgets six weeks before the Municipal budget 
and a Ward Committee meeting to facilitate the preparation of the budget shall be held 
three weeks before the preparation of the Ward Budget  
c.The Ward Committee shall be given access to the Municipal Budget and shall have the right  
to verify, seek clarifications and suggest chang es that need to be incorporated 
d.The Ward Committee shall be entitled to retain a specific percentage of the Ward Revenues for local development, as determined by the Greater Bengaluru Finance  Commission. 
Administrative, Supervisory and Audit Powers and Functions  
Along with planning and budgeting powers, to ensure that the daily administration at the Ward is 
carried out responsibly  and feedback from citizens acted upon , the Ward Committee has to be 
provided with a set of administrative, supervisory and audit powers. Hence the proposed legislation 
on the Greater Bengaluru Authority or an amendment to the KMC Act shall provide it with the 
following powers and functions:  
a. Ward Committee shall supervise all programmes and schemes being implemented by the 
Corporation in the ward  
b. Ward Committee shall have the power to conduct an audit, by itself or through an audit committee constituted for that purpose, of any project or work carried out by any public 
authority in the Ward  
c. If the Ward Committee finds the manner in which a ny project or work in the  Ward 
carried out to be unsatisfactory, for reasons that are to be recorded, it shall have the 
power to make any suggestion to improve it or recommend to the competent authority that the project or work be cancelled  
d. Ward committees shall have the power to recommend to the competent authority for imposition of penalties in respect of a Government employee for misconduct and negligence of duties.  
e. Ward Committees shall identify the list of beneficiaries for beneficiary oriented schemes implemented in the Ward by any Municipal Authority  
f. Ward Committees shall regulate or monitor all major municipal works in the Ward including solid waste collection and management, public health and sanitation; maintenance of public parks, playgrounds, lakes and water bodies; maintenance of roads, 
sidewalks, cycle lanes, skywalks and other infrastructure; regulation of rain water 
harvesting and groun d water recharging, among other tasks . 
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 78 4.4 WARD  ADMINISTRATION  AND  DECISION  MAKING  
4.4.1 Ward Administration
4.4.1.1 Current Set up and Challenges  
Under the current provisions of the KMC Act, there is thin administrative capacity at the Ward level. 
Subsection 4 of Section 13H of the KMC Act states that: “An officer of appropriate rank shall be 
designated by the Commissioner of the Corporation to act as Secretary for each Ward Committee to provide all administrative assistance to it. All minutes of the proceedings of the meeting of the Ward Committee shall be recorded by the Secretary and a copy of the same shall be forwarded to the 
Corporation.  ”Thoug h this is inadequate for the ward to become the nodal point of city governance , 
even such a measure has not been properly implemented.   
Civil society groups in their submissions to the Committee strongly suggest that necessary 
infrastructure and personnel  need to be provided for the effective functioning of Ward Committees. 
CIVIC Bangalore submitted that each Ward Committee should have a full time Secretary dedicated to 
the Ward, who is higher in the hierarchy than the ward -level officers of health, revenue, engineering 
and other departments he has to direct.  In addition they recommend that an Accounts Assistant, 
Office Assistant, Computer Operator and other technical support should be provided. Apart from the 
personnel to be provided at the Ward Committee  level it is proposed that members of the Ward 
Committee be allocated different portfolios depending on their expertise and interest. These ward sub-committees need to monitor their respective subject matter areas as well as grievance redressal 
and impleme ntation of the Citizens’ Charter of the municipal corporation. Thus, it proposes that 
services such as electricity, water supply, sanitation, garbage removal and the like should all have 
ward level officers who are responsible for the delivery of services at the ward level.  
4.4.1.2 Recommendation  for Ward administration 
From the above discussion it is clear that the current legal structure at the Ward level is inadequate to 
allow the ward the administrative capacity to emerge as the key unit of municipal governance. We are 
of the opinion that each Ward should have a ward secretariat which would be a centralized administrative unit that coordinates the functions of all relevant service providers in the ward. Further, the law should institutionalize Ward sub -committees to discharge the key functions at the 
ward level on a day to day basis so that the relationship between the political and administrative branches is made visible and accountable in everyday governance.  The manner in which ward level 
bureaucracy is to be organised is set out in greater detail in the Chapter 6  on Human Resources 
Management in this Report. 
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 79 4.4.2 Decision Making at the Ward  
4.4.2.1 Current Set up and Challenges  
Section 13H of the KMC Act lays down the procedure for decision making to be adopted by the Ward 
Committee. The Secretary, who is an officer appointed by the Corporation, is the nodal officer who co-
ordinates and convenes the meetings of the Ward Committee in consultation with the Chairperson. The 
statute mandates that Ward Committees are to meet at least once a month but there is no requirement for an annual meeting. Decision making in the Ward Committee is based on a majority vote of the members but the Chairperson of the ward committee may exercise a veto which is final and binding.
5 
The KMC Act also provides the Commissioner of the Corporation or his nom inee the right to participate 
and deliberate in Ward Committee meetings, though he/she will not have the right to vote.   
4.4.2.2 Examples of other Ward Decision Making Provisions  
The Model Nagara Raj Bill  provides for a notice period of 7 days before any Ward Committee meeting 
and permits all residents of the ward and the media to participate in these meetings. Further it mandates that minutes of the meeting are duly recorded and made publicly available right away.
6The 
Bill specifically distinguishes between annual meetings and monthly meetings7 and specifically 
requires the Ward Committee Chairperson to conduct Ward Committee meetings annually for the preparation of the ward plan, preparation of the ward budget and preparation of Ward maps, ward 
infrastructure index and other alternate functions. To facilitate the proper preparation of the budget, 
the Bill provides that a ward committee meeting shall compulsorily be held at least three weeks before 
the preparation of the ward budget and that all reports presented by the Ward Finance Committee for 
the past year shall be discussed in this meeting.  
West Bengal  also provides for a separate annual meeting of the Ward Committee other than the 
regular Ward Committee meetings. Rule 8 of the West Bengal Municipal (Ward Committee) Rules 
2001 also provides for Annual General Body Meetings where the Committee shall convene an annual 
general meeting of the residents of the ward by intimating every resident of the ward and also by public proclamation intimating the time and ven ue of the meeting to be held within the 30th June of 
every year to apprise them of the activities of the Municipality and the Ward during the preceding year 
                                                             
5Section 13H (P) provides that “Decisions of the Ward Committee shall normally be taken by the majority of the nominated 
members of the Ward Committee: Provided that the Chairperson may exercise a ‘veto’ over any decision by giving reasons in 
writing. The decision of the Chairperson shall be final and binding.”
6Section 19, Model Nagara Raj Bill . It provides that “R easonable notice of Ward Committee meetings should be given (at least 
one week in advance) and placed in the notice boards of all municipality offices in the ward. It also states “media will be 
encouraged to actively participate in the proceedings” and also that M inutes of Ward Committee meetings shall be made 
available to the general public for perusal and also presented at the next meeting of the Ward Committee.
7Section 19, Model Nagara Raj Bill
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 80 and to assess the popular needs of the ward for the current year. For annual general meetings, the 
Municipality is required to furnish the following documents to the Ward Committee for public information and deliberation thereon: a detailed report about the activities of the Municipality in the ward area during the preceding year, a copy of the Annual A dministration Report along with the 
Annual Financial Statement of the Municipality for the preceding year  
Civil society groups have suggested means to overcome the multiple deficits in the current provisions 
for the Ward Committee meetings. CIVIC proposed  that Ward Committee meetings shall be held on a 
fixed day each month: the first Saturday each month. Wide publicity should be given to the meeting 
and agenda through public notice as well as through other modes of activ e dissemination. It 
recommended that  the entire proceedings of the Area Sabhas and Ward Committees should be 
recorded (videographed / photographed) to show attendance and resolutions passed and the media 
should be invited to cover these meetings. The Ward Committee are also to  be empowered to summon 
concerned jurisdictional officials including those of the Electricity Supply company, city bus Transport 
Corporation, city police, Head Masters of primary schools, anganwadi workers, Primary Health Centre 
doctor, slum board, social welfare departm ent, food inspector and the labour inspector.  
4.4.2.3 Recommendation  for Ward decision making 
A review of the existing provisions makes clear that the current legal framework for Ward Committee 
decision making processes in the KMC Act is both inadequate and underspecified. So it is essential that we clearly identify two modes of decision making at the Ward Committee: the annual meeting and the 
monthly meeting. The annual meeting may be designed as a mandatory deliberative and 
accountability mechanism where citizens of the Ward have the right to attend through various ward 
level institutions and a ssociations like RWAs, NGO s, Slum Federations, Community Based 
Organisations,  Traders Associations,  etc. However, if the Committee is tasked with the role of 
approving a bud get or making a ward infrastructure report then the voting rights in the Committee 
must be limited to the members. In addition ,an amendment to the KMC Act  or the new proposed act on 
Greater Bengaluru Authority should mandate monthly meetings where there is  a regular review and 
supervision of the works conducted at the ward as well performance of the various executive branches responsible for service delivery within the ward. In the event, that the Chairperson or Secretary fails to convene the meeting, any member of the Ward Committee or 10 citizens of the Ward should be 
empowered to convene these statutory meetings. In all Ward Committee meetings , there should be an 
attempt to make decisions by consensus, failing which a majority vote may be taken. However, the 
Chairperson /Councillor of the Ward may be granted a casting vote apart from his regular vote in the 
Committee rather than a veto as is currently enjoyed.  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 81 4.5 TIER  2: MULTIPLE  MUNICIPAL  CORPORATIONS  
 
As the current model of governance in Bengaluru under a  single corporation has become unwieldy , the 
Committee has recognized the need for having multiple municipal corporations for Bengaluru in a three-
tier governance framework. The multiple Municipal Corporations would form the middle tier- between 
the Wards and the Greater Bengaluru Authority - in the three -tier governance system. This section 
examines the reforms needed in the middle- tier of the new governance framework of Bengaluru. We 
argue that for improving governance at this level, 4 major reforms need t o be carried out: adopting a 
directly elected Mayor system in which the Mayor has a fixed term of five years, creating Zonal Committees between the level of the Ward and the Municipal Corporation, devolving many functions of the Municipal Corporation to the Zonal Committees and recasting the role of Standing Committees by 
reducing their number and redefining their functions.  
One of the key issues in Bengaluru’s urban governance system currently is the absence of alignment of the 
political and administrativ e responsibilities of specific units of government. While parastatal bodies have 
executive authority with no political accountability at the appropriate level, we have a mayoral system which provides for the mayor to be the political head without adequate executive powers. The executive power of the Corporation is vested in the hands of the State government -appointed Commissioner and 
the Mayor largely performs a ceremonial role and has very little influence since he/she  only has a term of 
1 year.  We are of the opinion that  Bengaluru needs to opt for a Mayoral system in which the Mayor has a 
fixed 5 year term and also has executive powers. This can be achieved by a having directly elected Mayor or a Mayor -in-Council system. While we think both systems are go od options, on balance , we prefer to opt 
for the directly elected Mayor.  
 Below the Municipal Corporation, an intermediate unit of governance between the Ward and Municipal 
Corporation exists in the form of Zones. Presently the Zone is purely an administr ative unit. For the Zone 
to be a legitimate unit of governance, it must bring together both political and administrative capacity. 
Hence, we propose the creation of a Zonal Committee headed by a Zonal Commissioner and consisting of 
all ward councillors belonging to the Zone.  The Zonal Committee will be tasked with the responsibility of 
addressing matters that crosses ward jurisdictions within each Zone of a Municipal Corporation.  
In the context in which the Mayor and Zonal Committees are empowered to carry out the executive 
powers of the Corporation, the role of the Standing Committee needs to be revisited. Currently, the BBMP has 12 Standing Committees that have been made responsible for various municipal functions; however their functioning has often come under criticism. With the Mayor and Zonal Committees performing many 
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 82 of these tasks, the number of Standing Committees in the Municipal Corporation can be reduced and their 
funct ions redefined to ensure that they only play a deliberative and oversight role.  
This section  is divided into four  parts. Part 1 considers the options for reforming the Mayoral System in 
the Municipal Corporation and proposes the creation of an empowered and stable Mayor. Part 2 examines 
how governance at the Zonal level can be improved by empowering the Zonal Commissioners and creating Zonal Committees. Part s 3 discusses the functions of  the Zonal Committees and Municipal 
Corporations and also proposes how  Municipal Authorities need to be redefined. Part 4 examines the 
revised role of Standing Committees in the light of other changes in the municipal governance structure.  
4.6 MAYORAL  SYSTEM  FOR  MUNICIPAL  CORPORATION  
4.6.1 Current Set up and Challenges  
One of the most  important aspects of city governance, largely ignored in the debates on Bengaluru’s 
governance, is the choice of institutional design a Municipal Corporation adopts. The 74th 
Constitutional Amendment does not prescribe any specific system of local government and hence each state is free to decide on the type of municipal government it wants. The most common form of municipal government that has been followed in India is the Br itish -inspired Commisionerate system 
in which the mayor is indirectly elected  and vested with minimal powers. The two other systems, less 
prevalent in India, is that of a directly elected mayor system and a Mayor -in-Council system. Under the 
Commisionerate  system, the Municipal Commissioner appointed by the State Government is the Chief 
Executive of the Corporation and is vested with wide ranging powers. In this system, the Council is presided over by the Mayor who is indirectly elected by the councillors and is the ceremonial head of the Corporation. The Commisionerate system was first introduced in Mumbai and most other major cities, including Bengaluru, also adopted the Commisionerate system along the lines of Mumbai.
8 
As per Section 64 (1) of the KMC Act , the Commissioner of the Municipal Corporation is vested with 
the executive powers of the Corporation. The Commissioner is a non- elected member appointed by the 
State Government in consultation with the Mayor of the Corporation.9  Section 79 of the KMC Ac t 
grants the Commissioner the right to attend the meetings of the corporation and of any standing committee and to take part in the discussion without the right to move any resolution or to vote.  The 
fact that the Commissioner is the executive of the Corp oration is made clear in Section 64 (2) of the 
KMC Act which provides that “Any powers, duties and functions conferred or imposed upon or vested in 
                                                             
8Pinto, Marina. Metropolitan city governance in India. Sage Publications, 2000  
9Section 14, KMC Act  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 83 the corporation by any other law for the time being in force shall, subject to the provisions of such law, b e 
exercised, performed or discharged by the Commissioner.”  
Presently, the Mayor and Deputy Mayor are indirectly elected by the councillors from among 
themselves for a term of one year.10 As per Section 61 of the KMC Act, when the office of the Mayor is 
vacant, his functions shall devolve on the Deputy Mayor until a new mayor is elected. While the Mayor, 
who presides over the council, largely performs a ceremonial role, Section 60 of the KMC Act provides 
that the Mayor “shall have general powers of inspection and may give direction to the Commissioner with 
regard to the implementation of any resolution of the corporation or a standing committee in the discharge of any obligatory and discretionary functions of the corporation, and the commissioner shall 
comply  with such directions.”  
Despite this provision, historically the Mayor has exercised very little influence in the governance of 
Bengaluru.  Since the executive power of the Corporation is vested in the hands of the state 
government -appointed Commissioner and the Mayor only has a term of 1 year, the office of the Mayor 
has in effect become toothless. In considering reform in this area, we will need to re- examine this 
power balance and look to vest more executive power in the office of the Mayor to foster gr eater 
political accountability . 
4.6.2 Alternatives Considered for Mayoral system  
The two major alternative ideas of municipal governance we have considered are: Directly Elected 
Mayor and Mayor -in-Council  
4.6.2.1 Directly Elected Mayor  
One of the options for reform is t hat of having a directly elected mayor with a fixed term of 5 years.  
This would mean that in the municipal polls, along with election to the council, there would be a 
separate election for the post of the mayor. This is a reform suggested by the Kasturiran gan 
Committee on the BBMP, Agenda for Bengaluru’s Infrastructural Development (ABIDe) and Bangalore 
Political Action Committee (B.PAC), among others. In this framework, the Mayor would be vested with 
executive powers and will appoint a committee to assist in discharging his/her duties. This reform was mooted by the Kasturirangan Committee because it felt the need for a more powerful politically accounta ble leader at the local government level with a democratic mandate. The Committee 
                                                             
10 Section 10 (2) of the KMC act provides that “The Mayor or the Deputy Mayor shall hold office, for one year 
from the date of his election and shall, notwithstanding the expiry of the said period, continue in office till 
his successor is elected, provided that in the meantime he does not cease to be a councilor”  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 84 recommended that the directly elected Mayor function as the Chief Executive of the Corporation and 
be allowed to override the resolutions and decisions of the Corporation.   
Chennai introduced a directly elected Mayor system in 1996, though it briefly shifted back to indirect 
elections after a change in State Government and then reintroduced the directly elected mayor system. Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan and Himachal Pradesh also have adopted d irectly elected 
mayor systems. The Chennai City Municipal Corporations Act, 1919 provides for a mayor to be directly 
elected for a 5- year term and a deputy mayor to be elected by the counci llors from among themselves. 
The Chennai Act further provides that a mayor would not be eligible to stand for election for another 
term and that no council lor of the corporation would be eligible to stand for election as mayor. The 
Mayor is an ex -officio member of the Council and enjoys the s ame rights and privileges as the 
Councillors. However, the Mayor under the Chennai model is not vested with the executive powers  of 
the Corporation.  
4.6.2.2 Mayor -in-Council  
An alternative to a directly elected Mayor is to adopt a Mayor -in-Council system, similar  to the cabinet 
system of government followed in central and state governments in India. The executive power of the corporation can be shifted from the Municipal Commissioner to the Mayor -in-Council. In a Mayor- in-
Council system, as followed in Kolkata, both the Mayor and the Mayor -in-Council form the executive 
and they would typically belong to the political party or coalition that wins the majority of Wards in the Corporation. Such a system of Municipal Government is followed in Municipal Corporations and  
Municipal Councils in West Bengal.
11 
In the “Kolkata Model”, the Mayor- in-Council consists of a Mayor, Deputy Mayor and a ten -member 
council chosen by the 144 councillors among themselves. The executive power of the Corporation is exercised by the Mayor- in-Council. The term of office of the Mayor -in-Council is generally for five 
years. For the transaction of the business of the corporation, the Mayor allocates among the members of the mayor -in-council such business and in such manner as he thinks fit. Hence  like a cabinet system, 
each member is assigned different portfolios. The Kolkata model, thus, vests all executive power and 
functions in the Mayor -in-Council, following a  cabinet system similar to the State and U nion 
governments.
12 
                                                             
11 Under the West Bengal Municipal Act, 199 3 and the Kolkata Municipal Corporations Act, 1980  
12 See Pinto, Marina.  Metropolitan city governance in India . Sage Publications, 2000.  Ch. 7 “Calcutta’s Mayor -
in-Council”, pp. 161 -189 
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 85  
 
 
 
   
Fig 4a - Tenure and Mode of Election of Mayors in India’s major Cities   
4.6.3 Recommendation  for Mayoral system  
The Committee has considered both models  and is of the opinion that either of these options are better 
than the present system in Bengaluru where the Mayor is  a “one year wonder” with limited powers. 
Both systems have their advantages and can be adopted since both of them can ensure stability in the 
Mayor’s tenure as well as grant the Mayor executive powers.   While a Mayor in Council will provide for an execut ive which is jointly responsible to the council , a direct election for the mayor will make 
candidates appeal to citizens across wards and zones and thus help build wider consensus .  
We are of the opinion that at the level of the Greater Bengaluru Authority, a directly elected 
Metropolitan Mayor should ideally be at its helm. However, this can happen only after a new 
institution like GBA matures and hence we propose a gradual shift to an elected Metropolitan Mayor at GBA. But before transitioning to a direct ly elected metropolitan mayor for at that level, Bengaluru 
must get more used to the idea of a directly elected mayor and hence need to have such a system at the level of the corporation.  Hence the Committee recommends that the Municipal Corporations in the 
Greater Bengaluru Area adopt a directly elected Mayor system in which the executive power of the 
corporation is vested in the Mayor. The Mayor will be supported by a Mayoral Committee consisting of a maximum of 12 other members nominated by the Mayor. T he term of the Mayor shall be for a fixed 
period of five years so that they he/she has  adequate time to develop a vision for the city and 
implement it.  In the proposed Greater Bengaluru Authority Act, the following provisions can ensure 
these changes:  
  City  Election  Term  
Chennai  Direct  Five years  
Kolkata  Indirect  Five years  
Hyderabad  Indirect  Five years  
Mumbai  Indirect  Two and a half years  
Delhi Indirect  One year  
Bangalore  Indirect  One year  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 86  Election of Mayor:  
(1) The Mayor shall be elected by the persons whose names appear in the electoral roll of the 
corporation in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed  
Provided that no person shall be qualified for election as the Mayor unless his or her name is included in the electoral roll of any ward in the city.  
Provided further that a person who stands for election as Mayor shall not be eligible to stand for 
election as a councillor and a person who stands for election as a councillor sh all not be eligible to 
stand for election as a Mayor.  
(2) The election of the Mayor shall be held ordinarily at the same time and in the same places as 
the general elections of the councillors of the corporation are held.  
(3) The Mayor shall be an ex -offic io member of the corporation and shall have all the rights and 
privileges of an elected councillor of the corporation  
(4) The term of office of the Mayor shall, save as otherwise expressly provided in, be five years beginning from the day of the election o f the Mayor  
Deputy Mayor:  
(1) The Deputy Mayor shall be elected by the councilors from among themselves at the first 
meeting of the Corporation after a general election in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Deputy Mayor shall hold office for a period of five years from the date of his election.  
(3) When the office of Mayor is vacant, his/her functions shall devolve on the Deputy Mayor until 
a new Mayor is elected.  
Mayoral Committee:  
(1) There shall be a Mayoral Committee for t he municipal corporation which shall consist of the 
Mayor, Deputy Mayor and not more than twelve other members  
(2) The members of the Mayoral Committee other than the Mayor and Deputy Mayor shall be 
nominated by the Mayor from amongst the elected members o f the Corporation as soon as 
possible after he /she  enters upon his office  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 87 Provided that among the members nominated, there shall be at least two  members belonging to 
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, two members belonging to Other Backward Classe s 
and two members who are women 
(3) The Mayor shall, for convenient transaction of the business of the Corporation, allocate 
among the members of the Mayor al Committee  such business as he /she  thinks fit.  
Executive power of the Corporation: (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules and the regulations made thereunder, the 
executive power of the Corporation shall be vested in the Mayor  
 (2) All executive actions of the Mayor shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the 
Corporation.  
Commiss ioner of the Municipal Corporation:  
 (1) The Commissioner of the Municipal Corporation shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the 
prior approval o f the State Government. He/she  shall not be a member of the corporation and 
shall ordinarily hold office for a period of three years.  
(2) The Commissioner shall be the principal executive officer of the Corporation and shall, subject 
to the supervision and control of the Mayor, exercise the powers and perform the functions 
specifically conferred or imposed upon him  by or under this Act or by any other law in force for 
the time being.  
Alternative provision to be included in the proposed Greater Bengaluru Act, in case of  the Government  
adopting a Mayor -in-Council system: 
Constitution of the Mayor -in-Council:  
(1) There  shall be a Mayor -in-Council for every Municipal Corporation consisting of the Mayor, 
the Deputy Mayor and not more than twelve other elected members of the Corporation.  
(2) The elected members of the Corporation shall elect from amongst themselves, at the  first 
meeting of the Corporation after a general election, one member to be the Mayor of the 
Corporation  
Provided that the Mayor obtains the votes of at least 50 percent of the total strength of the elected members of the Corporation;  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 88 Provided further tha t if the no candidate obtains votes amounting to 50 percent of the total 
strength of the elected members of the Corporation, a second round of election is held between 
the two candidates getting the highest votes and the candidate winning maximum votes in the 
second round of election shall be the Mayor  
(3) The Deputy Mayor and the other members shall be nominated by the Mayor from amongst the elected members of the Corporation as soon as possible after he /she  enters upon his office  
Provided that among the  members nominate d, there shall be at least two  members belonging to 
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, two members belonging to the Other Backward Classes and two members who are women  
(4) The Mayor shall, for convenient transaction of the busine ss of the Corporation, allocate 
among the members of the Mayor -in-Council such business as he /she  thinks fit.  
(5) The Mayor may be removed from office by a resolution carried by a majority of the total 
number of elected members of the Corporation at a spec ial meeting of the Corporation called for 
this purpose upon a requisition made in writing by not less than one -third of the elected members 
of the Corporation  
(6) The Mayor -in-Council shall be collectively  responsible to the Corporation.  
4.7 ZONAL  GOVERNANCE  
The difficulties in administering an overarching geographical area can only be partially resolved by dividing the BBMP into several Municipal Corporations and providing for an empowered and stable 
mayor. To make governance closer and more accessible to the people, power needs to be further 
devolved to lower levels of municipal government. While many issues can be solved at the ward level, 
there would be matters that cross ward jurisdictions that would need the Municipal government’s attention. For many of t hese issues, the Municipal Corporation would still be too distant an institution. 
Hence an intermediate level of government, at the zonal level, can be better tasked with the responsibility to deal with functions that have  multiple ward implications.  
4.7.1 Consi derations and Alternatives  for Zonal Governance  
While the institutional structure of the Zone does not have a strong legal basis, the Zone continues to 
be an important unit of administration.  Presently, BBMP is divided into 8 zones: South Zone, East 
Zone,  West Zone, Mahadevapura, Dasarahalli, Yelahanka, Bommanahalli and Rajarajeshwarinagar.Each 
zone is headed by a Joint Commissioner, who is answerable to the Municipal Commissioner of BBMP. 
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 89 However, presently, the Zone is only an administrative unit and not  a political one. To ensure political 
accountability, the creation of Zonal Committees, consisting of all the councillors within the Zone, is an 
option to consider.  
The idea of a Zonal Committee is not entirely new. A similar system of committees constitutive of the 
Councillors of a geographic region within the Municipal Corporation exists in Kolkata through its Borough Committees.
13 The provision of constituting Zonal Committees was present in the 65th 
Amendment to the Constitution introduced by the Rajiv Gandhi government (which was ultimately defeated in the Rajya Sabha), in the recommendations of an Advisory Panel to National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution and in the Expert Committee for the Governance of Bengaluru Metropolitan Region and BBMP, headed by Dr. K. Kasturirangan. In its submissions before this Committee, Azim Premji University and CIVIC Bangalore had also proposed the creation of a similar body.  
The Advisory Panel on  “Decentralisation and Devolution; Empowerment and strengthening of 
Panchayati Raj Institutions”, chaired by Mr. L.C. Jain, constituted by The National Commission to Review the Worki ng of the Constitution, had suggested the need to have an intermediate lev el of 
government between the Ward Committee and Municipal Corporation. The advisory panel had the 
following recommendation:  
“In all Corporations with a population of six lakhs and more, Zonal Committees at a level between 
the Wards Committees and the Corporation Council should be formed. State laws may determine 
the number and area of such Zonal Committees. The Councillors of all the municipal wards 
represented in that area shall be members. In addition, one other person from each of the Wards Committees el ected by and from amongst the elected members of that Committee shall be a 
member of the Zonal Committee.”  
The Kasturirangan Committee recommended the creation of a Zonal Committee at the level of the Zone to ensure political authorities exist along with t he administrative structures. The Committee 
recommended -  
“The BBMP area may be divided into 8 -10 zones each comprising of about 20 Wards. A Zonal 
Committee which consists of the Councillors from each ward in the Zone must supervise service delivery and project implementation in the Zone and should be given the power to issue directions to the Zonal Office of the BBMP. The Zonal Committee may be given overall responsibility of 
                                                             
13 See Pinto, Marina.  Metropolitan city governance in India . Sage Publications, 2000. Ch. 7 “Calcutta’s Mayor -
in-Council”, pp. 161 -189 
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 90 collecting revenue; carrying out infrastructure and social services which go beyond a single ward; 
and streamlining and integrating ward level budgets into the zonal budget.”  
 
               
4.7.2 Recommendation  for Zonal governance  
The KMC Act does not expressly authorize either political or administrative government at the zonal 
level and does not have any provisions dealing with functions to be performed at the Zonal level. Still, in Bengaluru, Zones have de- facto played a key role in administering the  municipal functions under the 
aegis of a Zonal Commissioner. We believe that the Zone should be strengthened as a unit of 
governance and the Zonal Commissi oner empowered to carry out the  tasks of the municipal 
corporation within the Zone. To ensure that t he Zone is a legitimate unit of governance, we believe 
that along with the Zonal Commissioner, a Zonal Committee which includes all the councillors elected 
from the wards coming within the Zone should also be constituted. Unlike a Ward Committee, the membe rs of the Zonal Committee would also be members of the Municipal Corporation and can be 
entrusted with supervising the functions of the Municipal Corporation within the Zone.  Kolkata’s Borough Committees
An intermediate unit of governance at level of “Boroughs” exists in Kolkata and other municipalities 
of West Bengal. For every Municipality having a population of three lakhs, the West Bengal Municipal 
Act, 1993, provides for constitution of body called the “Borough Committee” which shall have the 
council lors of six or more contagious wards. As per the Section 11 of the Kolkata Municipa l 
Corporations Act, 1980, the Municipal Corporation in its first meeting, shall group the wards of the 
corporation which are contiguous in to fifteen boroughs, each consisting of such number of wards as 
the corporation may determine and constitute a boroug h committee for each such borough. Each 
Borough Committee consists of Councillors elected from the wards constituting the Borough and one 
them is elected as Chairman.  
The Borough Committee is subject to the general supervision and control of the mayor -in-council, 
and function within its local limits. The Borough Committees are carry out functions of the 
corporation relating to provision of supply pipes and sewerage and drainage connection to the 
premises, removal of accumulated water on streets or public places due to rain or otherwise, 
collection and removal of solid waste, disinfection, provision of health immunization services and 
bustee services, provision of lighting, repair of roads, maintenance of parks, drains and gulleys and 
such other functions as  the corporation decides. The officers and employees of the Corporation who 
are assigned to a particular Borough shall carry out such directions issued by the Borough 
Committee.  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 91 To institutionalise the functioning of Zones, it needs to be provided a statutor y form.  Hence, the 
proposed Greater Bengaluru Authority Act can provide for the following provision:  
Municipal Corporations to be divided into Zones:  
(1)The State Government shall, in consultation with the Greater Bengaluru Authority and the 
Municipal Corporation concerned, divide each Municipal Corporation into various zones, taking 
into consideration:  
(i) The population of any area 
(ii) The den sity of population of such area  
(iii) The revenue generated by the local administration of such area  
Provided that the area of eac h zone consists of a set of contiguous ward  
(2)The number of wards in each zone shall not exceed such number as may be determined by the 
State Government  
 
(3)The State Government shall constitute the zones by issuing a notification in the official gazette 
specif ying the set of wards which constitute each zone  
Provided that such notification shall be issued only after one month has lapsed from the publication of a draft notification inviting objections to the proposed zonal division  
Composition of Zonal Committee:  
(1) Each Zone of a Municipal Corporation shall have a Zonal Committee, consisting:  
a.The Zonal Commissioner, who shall be the Chairperson  
b.The Councillors elected from the wards within a Zone, who shall be members  
(2) The Zonal Commissioner shall be appointed by the State Government after consultation with the Mayor, and shall ordinarily hold office for a period of two years   
(3) The members of the Zonal Committee shall hold office till they cease to be Councillors in the Municipal Corporation  
(3) The Chairperson  shall preside over the meetings of the Zonal Committee and shall ensure that 
the Committee meets at least once a month.  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 92 4.8 REORGANISING  MUNICIPAL  FUNCTIONS  
4.8.1 Current Set up and Challenges
Presently, all the municipal functions of Bengaluru are assigned to a single tier of government at the corporation level. The KMC Act lays down the powers of the Municipal Corporations and also lists out 
a set of obligatory and discretionary functions. Section 58 of the Act gives a list of 33 obligatory 
function s. Illustratively, it includes: Cleansing of all public streets; collection, removal, treatment and 
disposal of sewage; the construction, maintenance and cleaning of drains; the lighting of public streets, maintenance and regulation of places for the disposal of the dead; construction and maintenance of public markets and slaughter houses; laying out new public streets; maintaining schools for pre -
primary education; planting and maintenance of trees; construction, maintenance, alteration and 
improvement of public streets, bridges, sub -ways; provision of public parks, gardens, play grounds, etc.  
Section 59 of the Act lists out a list of 26 discretionary functions including: maintenance of maternity 
and infant -welfare homes or centres; maintenance of chemical or bacteriological laboratories; 
construction and maintenance of drinking fountains; survey of buildings or lands; provision of music for the people;  maintenance of health museums; establishment and maintenance of museums and art galleries,  building and maintenance of suitable dwelling for the poor; slum improvements and 
upgradation; urban forestry, protection of the environment and promotion of ecological aspects;  
promotion of cultural, education and aesthetic aspects.  
4.8.2 Recommendation  for Municipal F unction s 
As it is clear from the lists above, the Municipal Corporation is now vested with the task of carrying out 
a plethora of disparate functions. Many of the functions listed presently under Section 58 and 59 of the KMC Act can be assigned to the Zonal Committees and Ward Committees. Under our proposed system, the Zon e shall be made responsible for all activities that need to be carried out across multiple wards 
within the same Zone. And the Municipal Corporation shall be responsible for all activities  that need to 
be carried out across zones within the same corporation. The Municipal Corporation would hence be 
able to focus on its core functions:  
-Policy, Rule and Regulation making;  
-Taxation, Finance and Accounts Functions;  
-Evaluation, Scrutiny and Accountability Functions.  
Howev er, the Municipal Corporation would still be vested with all  the municipal functions set out in 
Schedule XII (243 -W) of the Consti tution of India and Section 58 and  59 of  the KMC Act. The Zone will 
be the key administrative unit within a corporation and the Zonal Office and shall be made responsible 
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 93 for carrying out the municipal functions of the corporation within the zone. The Zonal Committee will 
hence play a key role in:  
-Discharging functions assigned to it by the corpora tion within the zone;  
-Proposing schemes and programmes to be carried out the corporation within the zone;  
-Supervising th e implementation of schemes, programmes of the corporation within the zone.  
However, to ensure that the Municipal Corporation has the flexibility and freedom to exercise the 
functions of the Corporation either by itself or through Zonal Offices, we believe the municipal 
functions need not be divided between the Zonal Committee and the Municipal Corporation under a statutory provision. Ba sed on an assessment of the work to be carried out and the activity mapping 
exercise, the Municipal Corporation may devolve certain functions to the Zones by issuing appr opriate 
regulations. C hapter  5 on Activity Mapping in this report  shall be a useful guide in allocating municipal 
functions across various levels. However, to ensure that the zonal committee is empowered to supervise the activities of the corporation within the zone, a statutory provision can lay out is powers 
and funct ions. Hence, the proposed Greater Bengaluru Authority Act can have the following provision:  
Powers and Functions of Zonal Committee:  
(1)The Zonal Committee shall, subject to the general supervision and control of the Corporation, 
discharge within the zone suc h functions as the Corporation may, from time to time, determine by 
regulations  
(2)The Zonal Committee may supervise the implementation of any project or scheme which the 
Corporation undertakes within the Zone  
(3)Having due regard to the budgets and plans made by the Ward Committee, the Zonal Committee 
may make recommendations to the Municipal Corporation about the programmes and schemes that need to be implemented in the Zone  
(4)The Zonal Committee shall be given access to the Municipal Budget and shall have the r ight to 
verify, seek clarifications and suggest changes that need to be incorporated in the budget  
(5)The Zonal Committee may supervise the utilization of the budget grants for discharging the functions of the Corporation within the zone  
(6)The Zonal Committee m ay conduct an audit of the Corporation accounts within the Zone and may 
also audit any project carried out by the Corporation in the Zone  
(7)The Zonal Committee may bring to the notice of Corporation any deficiency in the implementation of any project or sche me which the Corporation undertakes within the Zone and 
propose ways by which such deficiencies can be addressed.  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 94 (8)The Zonal Committee may make recommendations to the Municipal Corporation regarding any 
programme, policy or scheme that has a bearing on the development of the Zone.  
Integration of Parastatals at the Zone level  
We also recommend that the Zonal Commissioner chair a monthly meeting with the senior most 
officers of the Parastatal agencies operating within  the Zone. These meetings are to resolve any inter 
agency issues emerging from the relevant Ward Committee meetings during the previous period. The 
actions to be taken / taken by the Parastatals are to be conveyed to the respective Ward Committees.  Multiple parastatal agencies and State departments shall have quantified service level agreements at 
the zonal level with clearly defined ownership/responsibility.  
4.8.3 Redefining Municipal Authorities  
Under the current system, BBMP is the single corporation in Bengaluru and ex ercises its functions by 
itself and through the Commissioner and the Standing Committees. The Corporation consists of 198 
elected councillors, a maximum of 5 nominated members and Members of Parliament and Legislative 
Assembly whose constituencies lie with in the city.
14 Though administratively the Zone is an important 
unit through which the Municipal Corporation operates, it has not been statutorily empowered to carry out any functions. Section 6 of the KMC Act states that the following authorities shall be the 
“Municipal Authorities” of the corporation charged with carrying out the provisions of the Act:  
(a) the C orporation;  
(b) the S tanding committees; and  
(c) the Commissioner  
Hence, presently only one tier of government- at the level of the C orporation - has been empowered to 
carry out municipal functions. To ensure that Ward Committees, Zonal Committees, the Mayor and the Greater Bengaluru Authority are also empowered to carry out municipal functions, these bodies also need to be designated as Municipal Authorities. Since we are of the opinion that Standing Committees 
are not to exercise executive powers and the Commissioner is not to act independently of the Mayor 
and the Municipal Corporation, they should not be designated as Municipal Authorities. In t he 
proposed Greater Bengaluru Act, the following provision can ensure these changes:  
Municipal Authorities  
The following shall be the municipal authorities of Bengaluru charged with carrying out the 
provisions of this Act, namely: -  
                                                             
14 Section 7 (1), KMC Act  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 95 (a)Ward Committee   
(b)Zonal Committee  
(c)Mayor 
(d)Municipal Corporation and 
(e)Greater Bengaluru Authority  
4.9 ROLE  OF STANDING COMMITTEES  
4.9.1 Current Set up and Challenges  of Standing Committees  
The Standing Committees of the BBMP, have over the years, come to exercise a lot of influence in the 
admi nistration of the city. Along with the Municipal Corporation and the Commissioner, the Standing 
Committees have been designated as Municipal Authorities under Section 6 of the KMC Act. Section 11 
of the KMC Act provides for establishing 4 Standing Committe es for all corporations other than BBMP 
and 12 Standing Committees for BBMP. The 4 Standing Committees for all corporations other than BBMP are for the following: taxation, finance and appeals; public health, education and social justice; 
town planning and  improvement; and accounts.  
Section 11 of the KMC Act mandates the creation of the following Standing Committees for BBMP:  
(a) Standing Com mittee for taxation and finance  
(b) Standi ng Committee for public health  
(c) Standing Committee for town planning and improvement  
(d) Standing Co mmittee for major public works  
(e) Standing Committ ee for ward level public works  
(f) S tanding Committee for accounts  
(g) S tanding Committee for education  
(h) Standing Committee for social justice  
(i) Standing Committee for appeals  
(j) Stand ing Committee for horticulture  
(k) Standing Committee for markets  
(l) Standing Committee for establishm ent and Administrative Reforms  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 96 While the other corporations would have 7 councillors per Standing Committee, the KMC Act provides 
for 11  councillors for BBMP. The Standing Committee members are elected at the first meeting of the 
corporation after the general elections and at the first meeting in the same month in each succeeding year according to the principle of proportionate representation by means of single transferable vote. 
Each standing committee shall elect one of its members as chairman. The term of office of the 
members of the standing committee shall be one year from the date of their election. The Mayor and the Deputy Mayor shall ex-officio be members of all the standing committees but they shall not have 
the right of voting.  
The Standing Committee system in Bengaluru has become a proto -executive institution that has got 
involved in the grant and review of individual contracts. This has occurred as there is no ministerial structure at the Municipal level which is endowed with executive power. Hence, the various 
departments of the BBMP and the Commissioner respond directly to the Standing Committee which 
has given rise to sharp allegations of abuse of the Standing Committee system. It does not help that the KMC Act does not clear ly lay set out the functions of the Committee which has tacitly aided the 
Committee’s overreach.   The Standing Committees are given extensive powers as they may ‘deal with all matters’ relating to their subject area as set out in Section 61 -A of the KMC A ct. The Commissioner 
is expected to act in accordance with the decisions of the Standing Committee.  
4.9.2 Alternative Proposals for Standing Committees  
The Standing Committees at other levels of government - state and union legislatures - perform a 
legislative s crutiny function and not an executive function. In a legislature, such a committee has three 
major functions:  
-Evaluating legislation and sub -ordinate legislation  
-Reviewing the functioning of departments or agencies in its jurisdiction  
-Deliberating and proposing reform of government. 
 
As the Kasturirangan Committee has also observed, the Standing Committee system in Bengaluru 
confusingly straddles two aspects of municipal governance: as a municipal authority, authorizing executive action and as a deliberative authority, reviewing local law and policy and functioning of government at the urban local government level. The Committee recommended that:  
Standing Committees must hereafter play the role similar to that of Legislative House Committees 
as in other Legislatures; namely, to evaluate the functioning of departments and provide policy 
guidance. In these circumstances, there should be only three St anding Committees, namely: a 
Municipal Accounts Committee to work on the lines of the Public Accounts Committee…. The main 
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 97 purpose of this Committee would be to examine and scrutinize the accounts of the Corporation 
and to ensure that the money is spent for the designated purpose and in accordance with proper authority. Further, a Social Justice Committee and a Municipal Services Review Committee may be 
set up to oversee the functioning of two critical executive functions of municipal government  
4.9.3 Recommendat ion for Standing Committees  
In our proposed governance structure for Bengaluru, the Mayor  would be vested with exec utive 
powers of the corporation. The Mayor is also assisted by  a Mayoral Committee, consisting of a 
maximum of 12 members, who are allocated various subject matters which the corporation is 
responsible for. Along with this, every municipal corporation would have Zonal Committees  headed by 
Zonal Commissioners  that discharges  the functions of municipal corporations within the zone. Hence , 
in the new governance framework, the role of Standing Committees shall be substantially changed to 
reflect a much lesser mandate. The Standing Committee’s role can be redefined by reducing the 
number of Standing Committees and also revising their functions. The responsibilities of Standing 
Committees  need to be redefined in such a manner that it purely performs a deliberative and oversight 
function . The proposed Greater Bengaluru Authority Act can provide that the functions of the Standing 
Committee will be limited to:  
(a) reviewing rule and policy making by the Municipal Corporation in its area of expertise,  
(b) reviewing and monitoring the functioning of the departments in its area, and  
(c) make proposals for reform in rule and policy making.  
In light of its limited scope and also taking into account the fact that each Municipal Corporation will 
be smaller in the multiple municipal corporation framework, the number of Standing Committee of 
each Corporation shall also be reduced. The proposed Gr eater Bengaluru Authority Act can provide for 
the following Standing Committees for the Municipal Corporations  in Bengaluru :  
(a)Standing Committee for taxation, finance and appeals;  
(b)Standing Committee for budget and accounts  
(c)Standi ng Committee for other subj ects handled by the Corporation like public health, social 
justice, environment, etc.  
 
  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 98 4.10 TIER  1: METROPOLITAN  GOVERNANCE  
 
This section examines the top tier of governance for Bengaluru - the establishment of the Greater 
Bengaluru Authority (GBA) that would sit above the level of the multiple municipal corporations. As we 
argue below, we believe this metropolitan layer of governance is necessary for two reasons. First, if the BBMP is replaced by two or more municipal corporations in Bengaluru, the existence of the Greater Bengaluru Authority would be necessary to preserve an integrated identity for Bengaluru and to 
coordinate the activities of the various municipalities. Secondly, such an authority is required to bring the 
various parastatal bodies that are currently involved in the provision of various services in the city under 
the control of the municipal government.  
This section  is divided into three parts. Part 1 of this section  considers the reasons for proposing a 
metropolitan layer of governance and the constitution and functions of such a layer. Part 2 discusses how 
parastatal agencies may be integrated with municipal government.  Part 3 loo ks into the role that a 
Metropolitan Planning Committee will play under the proposed governance framework.  
4.11 GREATER  BENGALURU  AUTHORITY  
4.11.1 The Need for a Metropolitan Layer of Governance 
Currently, the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) is the single municipal corporation 
responsible for the governance of Bengaluru. This Committee has proposed splitting up the single municipal corporation into multiple municipalities for administrative convenience and for greater 
local accountability. We believe that in  the event of such a division of the municipal corporation, there 
would be a need for a new metropolitan tier of government to preserve the integrated identity of 
Bengaluru, coordinate the civic activities carried out by the different municipalities and parastatals 
and also take responsibility for planning for the metropolitan area.  
The Delhi Municipal Corporation was split up into three corporations – South Delhi Corporation, North 
Delhi Corporation and East Delhi Corporation – in December 2011. The expe rience with Delhi suggests 
that the implementation of the split has not gone as smoothly as intended with two of the three 
corporations (North Delhi Corporation and East Delhi Corporation) currently facing significant 
financial difficulties.
15 While there m ay be several reasons for this, a key issue with Delhi’s trifurcation 
                                                             
15 “Will Division Help Bengaluru? Look at Delhi” The New Indian Express,  March 23, 2015, available at 
http://www.newindianexpress.com/cities/bengaluru/Will -Division -Help -Bengaluru -Look -at-
Delhi/2015/03/23/article2725822.ece ; “Issue of Financial Crunch Raised During MCD Split,” Tim es of India,  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 99 was that it did not provide for an institutional architecture in which a body above the three 
corporations could coordinate their activities and ensure that financial imbalances did not result in uneven development.  Such an upper tier is necessary to enable planning for the entire metropolitan area and to check against uneven and haphazard development.  Hence, only with the creation of a metropolitan tier of government can the multiple m unicipality model work.  
The second reason for a metropolitan tier of governance relates to parastatals. Currently, a number of 
the key urban civic services in Bengaluru are provided by various parastatal agencies such as the 
Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board (“BWSSB”), the Bangalore Electricity Supply Company (“BESCOM”) and Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation (“BMTC”).  Other parastatal agencies such as the Bangalore Development Authority (“BDA”) and the Bangalore Metropolitan Region Develo pment Authority (“BMRDA”) are involved in planning and infrastructural development for the 
city.
16  Currently, these parastatal agencies are not accountable to the municipal government and 
report directly to the relevant ministry in the State government. Ho wever, as discussed in Part 2 
below, it is critical that such agencies are integrated with the municipal government for coordination and to foster local accountability. The appropriate tier of local governance into which to integrate these agencies would be the metropolitan tier given that all of these agencies would operate across more than one municipal corporation.  
Currently, there is no metropolitan level of government in Bengaluru or in other metropolitan cities in 
India. Instead, the two types of bodies that exist at the metropolitan level are:  
•Development agencies and metropolitan regional authorities, such as the BDA and BMDRA in 
Bengaluru: These agencies play a role similar to that of a metropolitan level government with certain planning, regulating  and implementing powers, but without any democratic 
accountab ility at the metropolitan level  
•The Metropolitan Planning Committee (“MPC”): This is a requirement for all metropolitan 
cities under the 74
th Constitutional Amendment, and while its composition ensures democratic 
accountability, it only performs a planning role and is not made responsible for integrating the 
various civic functions of the city.  
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
March 24, 2015, available at http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/delhi/Issue -of-financial -crunch -
raised -during -MCD -split/articleshow/46669649.cms 
16Idiculla, Mathew Prasad, “A guide to Bangalore’s Civic Agencies”, Citizen Matters, (2010) April 28. 
Available at http://bangalore.citizenmatters.in/articles/1968 -all-about -bangalore -civic -agencies  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 100  Hence we currently have development authorities exercising wide powers with limited accountability 
and the provision for an MPC that has elected leaders but with limited functions.  Our proposals for a 
Greater Bengaluru Authority seek  to address this disconnect and ensure that the powers exercised by 
development authorities is vested in a body with democr atic accountability at the metropolitan level. 
As Mr. KC Sivaramakrishnan, one of the architects of the 74th Amendment, has observed, the MPC has 
not been able to provide effective metropolitan governance and hence it is time to look at alternatives.
17 We believe an institution like the Greater Bengaluru Authority can provide effective and 
accountable governance for metropolitan Bengaluru while the MPC can ensure that planning for the 
larger metropolitan region is done effectively.  
Currently, the BDA is assigned as the Local Planning Authority (LPA) under the Karnataka Town and 
Country Planning (KTCP) Act, 1961 responsible for preparing the Master Plan of the Local Planning 
Area of Bengaluru which constitutes 1307 sq.km. The MPC was also constituted in 2013 t o cover the 
same jurisdiction. For a much larger Bangalore Metropolitan Region (BMR) of 8000 sq.km, the BMRDA 
is currently responsible for preparing the Structure Plan for the BMR. The BMRDA shall also discharge the functions of the Director of Town Planni ng whereby BDA and other LPAs within BMR have to 
submit their plans to BMRDA for approval.  
As discussed in Part 3, we would suggest that the Metropolitan Planning Committee be constituted for 
the larger metropolitan area of the Bangalore Metropolitan Region covering 8000 sq.km, currently 
under the jurisdiction of the BMRDA. As a planning body which is responsible for developing long term development plans, the MPC needs to have jurisdiction over the entire metropolitan region.  However having a municipal government for such a large area would be unworkable, hence it is proposed that the proposed Greater Bengaluru Authority be made responsible for governance of the Bangalore 
Metropolitan Area of 1307 sq.km, which is currently the area under BDA’s jurisdiction.  Presently, only 709 Sq.km of this region is under a Municipal Corporation (the BBMP) and  the rest is largely rural. 
However, over the next decade, through a Municipalisation strategy, municipal services should be extended to the rest of the regions so they can easily transition to urban areas. While the MPC would be responsible for preparing the regional development plans for the larger metropolitan region, the 
GBA would be responsible for master planning, plan enforcement and co -ordination of civic services in 
the smaller metropolitan area and would also have control of parastatal agencies. They will also focus 
on Economic Development.  
                                                             
17Sivaramakrishnan, KC. Governance of Megacities: Fractured Thinking, Fragmented Setup . Oxford University 
Press, 2014. Chapter 11 Towards an Alternative Entity for Metropolitan Governance  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 101  4.11.2 Constitution of the Greater Bengaluru Authority  
Since there is currently no legal provision for such a body, the proposed statute for the Greater 
Bengaluru Authority (GBA) shall constitute the GBA and instituti onalize its functions.  The GBA is to 
provide a forum for integrating the various functions of city government across different geographical 
regions within the Greater Bengaluru Area.  The GBA will be headed by the Chief Minister and its 
membership will include commissioners and mayors of the municipal corporations, elected representatives of local bodies, representatives from various parastatal agencies as well as nominated experts. Since a politically powerful person has to be in charge of the GBA to ensu re that its decisions 
are executed, we feel the Chief Minister should be its Chairman. Over time, as GBA matures as an 
institution and gets entrenched in Bengaluru society, it could be headed by a directly elected 
Metropolitan Mayor.  
The composition of the  GBA, provided for below,  ensures that  a majority of its members are elected by 
the Municipal Corporations and rural local bodies in the Greater Bengaluru Area. To ensure that the 
GBA is able to effectively carry out its functions of planning, coordinating  and administration over all 
essential services, representatives of various parastatal and state authorities have been made members or permanent invitees of the GBA. Hence the GBA reflects the principles of democratic 
accountability and also ensures functi onal representation from different services providers. The 
following provision shall be introduced to lay out the composition of the Greater Bengaluru Authority:  
Constitution of the Greater Bengaluru Authority: 
 (1) As  soon as may be after the date of commencement of this Act, the Government shall, by 
notification, constitute for the Greater Bengaluru Area an Authority to be called the Greater 
Bengaluru Authority.  
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate having perp etual succession  and a common seal, with 
power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both moveable and immoveable and to contract 
and, may, by the said name, sue or be sued.  
(3) The Greater Bengaluru Authority shall consist of the following members, na mely: -  
i. The Chief Minister of Karnataka, who shall be the Chairperson  
ii. The Metropolitan Commissioner of Greater Bengaluru Authority, who shall be the 
Member Secretary  
iii. The Commissioner, Bangalore Development Authority  
iv. The Chairman, Bangalore Water Supply an d Sewerage Board  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 102  v. The Chairman, Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation  
vi. The Chairman, Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation  
vii. The Managing Director, Bangalore Electricity Supply Company  
viii. The Mayors of the Municipal Corporations within the Greater Bengaluru Area  
ix. One Member from each Zone of the Municipal Corporations within the Greater Bangalore 
Metropolitan Area, elected by the councillors of the Zone among themselves  
x. One Member of Legislative Assembly from each Municipal Corporation of the Greater Bengaluru   Area, whose constituency lies within or substantially under the jurisdiction of 
the particular Municipal Corporation, elected by the members of the Corporation  
xi. Two members elected by and from amongst the Adyakshas and Upadyakshas of Zilla Panchayat, Taluk Panchayat and Grama Panchyats within the Greater Bengaluru  Area, the election being held according to a system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote  
xii. Five members who have knowledge and experience in urban planning, admi nistration, 
law, ecology or any matter related with city governance, nominated by the State Government  
 
(4) The heads of Department of Urban Land Transport, Bangalore  City Police, Karnataka Fire and 
Emergency Services and Karnataka Slum Clearance Board sha ll be ex -officio members of the 
Greater Bengaluru Authority and may be mandated to attend its meetings but shall not have the 
right to vote  
(5) The Chairperson has to convene the meetings of the Greater Bengaluru Authority in such a manner that at least on e meeting is held every two months.  
(6) The C hairperson, if for any reason  is unable to attend any meeting, may nominate any other 
member of the Authority to preside the meeting of the Authority  
(7) The quorum required for the meeting is half the total st rength of the Greater Bengaluru 
Authority.  
(8) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided by majority 
of the votes of the members present and voting and in the event of an  equality of votes, the 
Chairperson  or in his /her absence the person presiding, shall have and exercise a second or 
casting vote.  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 103  (9) The Authority shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at 
its meetings as may be prescribed by regulations.  
(10) The Bangalore Development Authority shall be the Secretariat to the Greater Bengaluru 
Authority and shall assist the Authority in carrying out its functions.  
 
 THE GREATER LONDON AUTHORITY : 
The Greater London Authority is the highest administrative bod y for Greater 
London. It was established by the Greater London Authority Act, 1999. It comprises 
of the Mayor of London who is directly elected and an Assembly, referred to as the 
London Assembly which is comprised of twenty five members. The Authority is 
envisaged as a body corporate with its principal purposes as:  
a)promoting the economic development and wealth creation in Greater 
London;  
b)promoting social development in Greater London and;  
c)promoting the improvement of the environment in Greater London.  
The Authority is the chief administrative body of Greater London. Though it shares 
some of its administrative powers with the Councils of the other 32 London 
Boroughs, its scope of authority is limited. It mainly exercises its power in the 
domains of trans port, planning and development, policing and probation services, 
fire and emergency planning. It has four principal bodies through which it performs its functions in the above domains:  
i. Transport for London
: which is responsible for the public transport 
system of London, the roads, traffic, highways etc.  
ii. The London Development Agency : which was responsible for submitting 
a draft of its strategy to drive sustainable economic growth and 
development in London. It was replaced by GLA Land and Property by the 
Localism Act of 2011.  
iii. Metropolitan Police Authority : includes the general functions of a police 
authority, to secure the maintenance of an efficient, effective police for its 
area. It comprises of Commissioners and Commanders who exercise their 
power in ac cordance with the Act.  
iv. London Fire and Emergency Planning Authority : which is responsible for 
the fire brigade in London.  
All the four bodies in performing their functions shall have regard to the strategy 
developed by the London Development Agency, appro ved by the Mayor.  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 104  4.11.3 Functions of the Greater Bengaluru Authority  
The role of Greater Bengaluru Authority becomes very crucial for the governance of Bengaluru in a 
context where there are multiple municipal corporations and many parastatal agencies responsi ble for 
city governance. Hence, the Greater Bengaluru Authority shall perform four essential functions:  
•Planning: Preparation of Master Plans,Strategic Plans and other Development Plans  
•Coordinating: The activities of various Municipal Corporations and Parastatal Agencies  
•Administering: The municipal functions that have a metropolitan wide impact  like mobility and 
mega infrastructure projects that cut across the city  
•Control over Parastatal Agencies: Have direct control over and authority to direct the 
functioning of some parastatal agencies.  
 
In order to carry out these functions, the Greater Bengaluru Authority would have to replace the BDA 
as the Local Planning Authority for the Local Planning Area of Bengaluru (Greater Bengaluru Area) under the Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act, 1961.  The BDA would continue to have a role 
but will function within the GBA and act as the secretariat to the GBA and assist it in its planning 
function. Since the GBA is designated as the Local Planning Authority, it shall be responsible for preparin g the Master Plan for Bengaluru . However, the current framework of land use based Master 
Planning has been ineffective. Hence, Bengaluru should shift to a new system of strategic spatial planning that will be done by the GBA. The Karnataka Town and Country Plann ing Act, 1961 would 
need to be suitably amended to give effect to these changes. The specifics of strategic spatial planning 
is further explained in Chapter 8  of this report.  
Along with Master Planning and Strate gic Spatial Planning, the Greater Bengaluru Authority shall also 
be responsible for developing long term Development Plans (like the Comprehensive Development 
Plan required under JNNURM) Vision Plansand Sectoral Plans for Bengaluru. In preparing various plans, the GBA shall take into consideration all the plans prepared by Municipal Corporations and all 
other government agencies operating in the Greater Bengaluru Area and inputs and suggestions 
received by citizens and stakeholder groups in a wide ranging c onsultation process . These p lans shall 
follow the guidelines laid down by the Metropolitan Planning Committee.  
The GBA shall  be empowered to formulate schemes necessary for implementing the p lansit has drawn 
up and coordinate with Municipal Corporations a nd Parastatal Agencies in executing the same. Along 
with planning functions, it shall also be responsible for administering city -wide municipal functions 
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 105  which cross the boundaries of a municipal corporation like the construction and maintenance of 
arteria l roads, elevated expressways and storm water drains.  
For ensuring that the GBA is provided with strategic vision for economic development and 
employment generation, an Economic Development Agency should be created and housed within the GBA. One of the key concerns with the division of BBMP, based on the experience of Delhi, is concerns 
regarding financial imbalances between municipal corporations. For Bengaluru, we propose the 
creation of a Greater Bengaluru Finance Commission on the lines of the State Fi nance Commission 
housed at the GBA to ensure that all the corporations and the units below it have the financial 
resources necessary to carry out the functions assigned to them.  The role of the Greater Bengaluru 
Finance  Commiss ion will b e covered in detai l in Chapter 7 .  
The following provision s shall be introduced in the Greater Bengaluru Authority Act to ensure that 
they are empowered to carry out their functions effectively:  
Functions of the Greater Bengaluru Authority:  
(1)Preparation of Master Plan and Strategic Spatial P lan for the Greater Bengaluru Area  
(2)Preparation of Development Plans, Vision Plans, Sectoral Plans  and any other longer term 
development plan for the Greater Bengaluru Area  
(3)Formulating schemes necessary for implementing the Master Plan,  Strategic Spatial Plan, 
Development Plan s and any other plan prepared by the Greater Bengaluru Authority  
(4)Coordinating the execution of the Master Plan, Strategic Spatial Plan, Development Plans and 
other plans in accordance with the said schemes  
(5) Assisting  Municipal Corporations in the execution of plans, project and schemes and 
entrusting them the responsibility of execution of any development plan  
(6)Coordinating and supervising the activities of the Bangalore Development Authority, the 
Bengaluru Water Supp ly and Sewerage Board, the Bangalore Electricity Supply Company and 
such other bodies as are connected with developmental activities in the Greater Bengaluru Area.  
 
Greater Bengaluru Authority to be the Local Planning Authority : 
(1)The Greater Bengaluru Authority shall be the Local Planning Authority for the local planning area comprising the Greater Bengaluru Area.  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 106  (2)The Bengaluru Development Authority shall cease to be the Local Planning Authority for the 
Local Planning Area of Bengaluru under the Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act, 1961  
(3)The Greater Bengaluru Authority shall exercise the powers, perform the functions and discharge the duties assigned to it as if it were a Local Planning Authority constituted for the Bengaluru City under the Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act, 1961  
 
Administering Municipal Functions within the Greater Bengaluru Area:  
The Greater Bengaluru Authority shall be responsible for carrying out the following functions in 
the Greater Bengaluru Area in coordination with various Municipal Corporations and Parastatal 
Agencies of the region:   
(i)      Construction, improvement and maintenance of arterial roads, elevated 
expressways and major flyovers.  
(ii)       Establishment, improvement and maintenance of storm water drain network  
(iii) Preparation of Traffic Management Plans and Implementation of Intelligent 
Transport Systems  
(iv)Establishment, improvement and maintenance of distribution and supply of electricity to Main Lines  
(v)Establishment, improvement and maintenance of distribution and supply of water distribution network to Main Lines  
(vi)Establishment, improvement and maintenance of sewerage network to Main Lines  
(vii) Establishment and operation of Geographical Information System  
(viii) Approval of development plans for large housin g layouts and commercial and 
industrial estates  
 
Economic Development Agency :  
(1) The Greater Bengaluru Authority shall, within one year of its constitution, establish an 
Economic Development Agency with the Metropolitan Commissioner as its chairman and such 
other members that the Authority may decide  
(2) The Economic Development Agency shall be tasked with the responsibility of attracting 
investments and employment generation  in the Greater Bengaluru Area  by building suitable 
public  and private  alliances 
  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 107  Greater Bengaluru Finance  Commission  
(1) The State Government shall, within one year of the constitution  of the Greater Bengaluru 
Authority , constitute a Greater Bengaluru Finance  Commission to review the financial position of 
the Municipal Corporations  in the Greater Bengaluru Area and to make recommendations to the 
Metropolitan Commissioner regarding the manner in which:  
(a) Net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees levied by each Municipal Corporation 
shall be distributed between the Ward Committee, Zonal Committee and Municipal 
Corporation  
(b) Surplus of tax revenues collected by Municipal Corporations shall be utilized by the 
Greater Bengaluru Authority  
(c) Grants -in-aid from the Consolidated Fund of the State shall be allocated between the 
Municipal Corporations in the Greater Bengaluru Area  
(d) Any other grant or loan from the State Government or the Union Government is to be 
allocated between the Municipal Corporations in the Greater Bengaluru Area  
(e)F inancial resources of the Greater Bengaluru Authority and agencies within its 
jurisdiction needs to be improved  
(2) The Commission shall determine their procedure and shall have such powers in the 
performance of their functions as the State Government may confer on them.  
(3) The M etropolitan Commissioner shall consider every recommendation made by the 
Commission and present before the Greater Bengaluru Authority the manner in which funds are to be distributed between the various Municipal Authorities of the Greater Bengaluru Author ity. 
4.12 INTEGRATING  PARASTATAL  AGENCIES  WITH  GREATER  BENGALURU  AUTHORITY  
4.12.1 Current Set up and Challenges  
In Bengaluru, a number of essential governance functions are carried out not by the municipal 
corporation but through parastatal agencies. The Bengaluru Development Authority (BDA), the city’s urban planning and development authority, is a key parastatal agency and many of the city’s essential 
services such as water supply, electricity and transport are also provided  by parastatals.  The 
fundamental issue with this framework is that these parastatals are not accountable to any municipal authority and are in stead only accountable to the relevant ministries of the state government. Further, 
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 108  the different parastatal agencies in Bengaluru each operate within different geographical limits and 
through different units and sub- units, making coordination of the various urban services difficult.18 
In order to foster democratic accountability and to facilitate the coordination of different civic 
services, parastatal agencies need to integrated with the Greater Bengaluru Authority and made accountable to the lower tiers of municipal government.  In th is section, we discuss the means of 
integrating these parastatal agencies with the GBA.   
4.12.2 Modes of Integration of Parastatals  
We have considered three options for integrating these parastatal agencies into local government:  
One option is to transfer the ow nership of all parastatal agencies to the Greater Bengaluru Authority. 
While this might appear to be a drastic overhaul, various versions of a form of ownership transfer have been proposed in the past. For example, the Kasturirangan Committee Report recomm ended that a 
Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) should be established under the common ownership of the BBMP and BWSSB. The SPV would initially manage the retail distribution of water within the BBMP area while the BWSSB would continue to deal with water source  augmentation, sewerage and waste water 
management. These functions would subsequently be transferred to the BBMP. 
A second method would be for municipal government to have administrative control over the 
parastatal agencies. The extent of administrative control may vary for different parastatal agencies 
and could range from the GBA exercising full control over a parastatal’s functioning to a situation 
where the parastatal continues to function as an independent body but with the GBA having the power to cal l for the agency’s reports and to coordinate its activities.  Ideally, the parastatal agencies should 
be also be accountable to ward committees and zonal committees. To enable such administrative control, the jurisdiction of all parastatal agencies would have to be aligned with the GBA and its su b-
units would need to be adapted  to overlap as far as possible with wards and zones.   
A third option would be for the Municipal Authorities (municipal corporations, zonal committees and 
ward committees) to have con tractual relationships with parastatal agencies for delivery of services in 
their jurisdiction.  This would enable the municipal government to contract with the agency of their 
choice for the delivery of these services. While establishing contractual relat ionships between local 
government authorities and parastatal agencies might be the most advantageous in the long run, establishing such a system would involve a significant overhaul of the current framework and cannot occur overnight.  
                                                             
18 Ramanathan, Ramesh, “Urban Services: Too Many Cooks,” India Together, January 17, 2005, available at 
http://indiatogether.org/manycooks -government  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 109  4.12.3 Recommendation  for p arastatal integration  
The models of integration that we have proposed, involve combinations of the first and second 
options described above.  In the case of some parastatal agencies like BDA and BWSSB, we have proposed a total integration with the GBA whereby the agency comes directly under the 
administrative control of the GBA. For government owned co rporations such as the BMTC and 
BMRCL, we suggest that they be integrated with the GBA through a transfer of ownership from the 
government to the GBA. In addi tion to these provisions, we suggest that the GBA and the lower levels 
of government be statutorily empowered to coordinate with the parastatal agencies operating within its jurisdiction in the delivery of various civic services.  The power to issue direct ions and supervise 
certain parastatals already exists with the BMRDA; however we propose that the BMRDA (which would act as a secretariat to the MPC) be divested of these powers and the GBA instead be vested 
with them.  
4.12.4 Integrating BDA and BWSSB with the G BA 
The first model of integration involves bringing the parastatal agency under the direct control of the 
GBA. This model would apply to those parastatal agencies that are statutory bodies constituted under specific legislation, such as the Bangalore Devel opment Authority (BDA) and the Bangalore Water 
Supply and Sewerage Board (BWSSB).  In order to achieve a total integration of such agencies into the 
GBA, amendments would be required to the various statutes that established the parastatals to (a) 
provide f or the dissolution of the board or governing body of the parastatal and (b) state that, as of a 
specified date, the parastatal would no longer function as an independent agency, but as a department of the GBA. This would involve adding a provision that the relevant agency would only be accountable 
to and have the ability to take directions from the GBA rather than from the relevant ministry in the State Government.  
In addition to changes to the statutes governing parastatals, the following provisions need to be 
introduced either as amendments to the KMC Act or as part of a new legislation for the Greater 
Bengaluru Authority.  
Control over Parastatal Agencies:  
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board Act, 
1964 and Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976, the Greater Bengaluru Authority shall have the power of superintendence over the Bangalore Water Supply and Sew erage Board Act 
and Bangalore Development Authority and shall have the power to direct and supervise all 
activities that such agencies are entitled to perform pursuant to the provisions of those statutes.   
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 110  (2) The Greater Bengaluru Authority shall be enti tled to call for periodic reports from the 
parastatal agencies and shall be further entitled to issue instructions to those agencies with 
regard to the performance of any of their functions contained in the provisions of their 
constituent statutes.  
4.12.5 Integra ting BESCOM, BMTC and BMRCL with the GBA  
Some parastatals in Bengaluru are statutory corporations that are owned by the state government. For 
example, the Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation (BMTC) is a corporation constituted 
pursuant to the Road  Transport Corporation Act, 1950, and is wholly owned by the state government. 
The Bengaluru Metro Rail Corporation Limited (BMRCL) was established under the Companies Act, 
1956 as a joint venture between central and state governments. For such parastatal agencies, we propose a model of integration that would involve the state and central government transferring their equity in these corporations, wholly or partly, to the GBA. These agencies would, thus, function as separate legal entities but under the ownership of the GBA.  
In addition to the transfer of ownership, the following provisions need to be introduced either as 
amendments to the KMC Act or as part of a new legislation for the Greater Bengaluru Authority to 
ensure that these statutory corporations come within the administrative control of the GBA and the 
tiers of municipal government below it.  
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the relevant charters governing the Bengaluru 
Metropolita n Transport Corporation, the Bengaluru  Metro Rail Corporation Limited and 
Bangalore Electricity Supply Company Limited , the Greater Bengaluru Authority shall have the 
power of superintendence over these corporations and shall have the power to direct and 
supervise all activities that such corp orations are entitled to perform pursuant to the provisions 
of their charters or any other statute currently in force.   
(2) The Greater Bengaluru Authority shall be entitled to call for periodic reports from these 
corporations and shall be further entitled to issue instructions to those corporations with regard to the performance of any of their functions contained in the provisions of their constituent 
charters and receive periodic report of their activities  
4.12.6 Coordinating the functioning of Parastatal Agen cies  
In addition to bringing parastatal agencies within the control of the GBA it would be important to 
ensure that the activities of these agencies are coordinated at the lower tiers of municipal government, namely the zones and wards. We would, therefore, recommend adding a provision that would give all 
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 111 municipal authorities at all tiers of government the power to seek reports from these parastatal 
agencies and seek explanations from these agencies regarding service delivery within the municipal authority ’s jurisdictions. Also with respect to certain parastatal agencies (like BESCOM, whose 
geographic jurisdiction  of 8 districts far  extends beyond that of GBA) it will not be feasible to achieve a 
total integration with the GBA. However, the GBA can continue to play an important role in 
coordinating and directing its functions.  
The following provisions would need to be added to KMC Act or to the act constituting the GBA for 
ensuring coordination:  
Issuing Directions to Authorities:  
(1) The Greater Bengaluru Authority may, in order to carry out its master plan, social and 
economic development plan or any other plan or scheme it is empowered to formulate, issue directions to Bangalore Development Authority, Bangalore Water Supply and S ewerage Board, 
Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation, Bengaluru Metro Rail Corporation Limited, Bangalore Electricity Supply Company and such other bodies operating in the Greater Bengaluru Area.   
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other  law for the time being in force, every such 
direction shall be complied with by the body to whom it is issued. On failure, it shall be competent for the Authority to take necessary action to carry out the directions issued under sub- section (1) 
and recove r expenses, if any, incurred therefor from the body concerned.  
(3) Any dispute which arises between the Authority and the Boards or other bodies referred to in sub-section (1) in respect of the directions issued to them shall be determined by the State 
Government whose decision shall be final.  
Coordination of Parastatals with Municipal Authorities: 
(1) A Municipal Authority under this Act shall be entitled to request the Bangalore Development 
Authority, Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board, Bangalore  Metropolitan Transport 
Corporation, Bengaluru Metro Rail Corporation Limited, Bangalore Electricity Supply Company 
and such other bodies operating within its jurisdiction to designate an official of such body as its 
representative for the Municipal Authority  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 112  (2) Such Municipal Authorities shall be entitled to summon the designated officials to its meetings 
and seek explanations regarding the delivery of any service which the body that the designated 
official represents within the jurisdiction of the Municipal Authorities  
4.13 METROPOLITAN  PLANNING  COMMITTEE  (MPC)  
The 74thConstitutional Amendment requires that a metropolitan area, consisting of two or more 
Municipalities or Panchayats with a total population of more than ten lakhs, shall have a Metropolitan 
Planning Committee to prepare a draft development plan for the Metropolitan area.  Article 243ZE of the 
Constitution of India provides that  “ There shall be constituted in every Metropolitan area a Metropolitan 
Planning Committee to prepare a draft development plan for the Metropolitan area as a whole”19 and 
further provides that State Legislatures may enact legislation for the composition of MPCs, 
selection/election of their members and their functions.   
In order to bring the KMC Act in conformity with provi sions of the 74th Constitutional Amendment, the 
KMC Act was amended (Amending Act 35 of 1994) to provide for the constitution of Metropolitan 
Planning Committees in every Metropolitan area. Despite the Constitutional provision and state legislation, however, an MPC was not constituted for Bengaluru for more than 20 years. It was only in 2013 that the rules required to operationalize MPCs were issued by the State Government. Following the issue of the rules, members were elected to the MPC in 2014; however, the MPC has still not started 
functioning.  
4.14 TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION  OF MPC  
As per the provisions of the Constitution and the KMC Act, the state government can define the territory constituting a “metropolitan area” by an executive notification.
20  Currently, the area that has been 
                                                             
19Article 243ZE further provides in relevant part: Every Metropolitan Planning Committee shall, in preparing 
the draft development plan, —(a ) have regard to —(i ) the plans prepared by the Municipalities and the 
Panchayats in the Metropolitan area; ( ii) matters of common interest between the Municipalities and the 
Panchayats, i ncluding co -ordinated spatial planning of the area, sharing of water and other physical and 
natural resources, the integrated development of infrastructure and environmental conservation; ( iii) the 
overall objectives and priorities set by the Government of  India and the Government of the State; ( iv) the extent 
and nature of investments likely to be made in the Metropolitan area by agencies of the Government of India 
and of the Government of the State and other available resources whether financial or otherw ise; ( b) consult 
such institutions and organisations as the Governor may, by order, specify.  
20Clause (c) of Article 243P of the Constitution of India provide the definition of a metropolitan area -
“Metropolitan area” means an area having a population of ten lakhs or more, comprised in one or more 
districts and consisting of two or more Municipalities or Panchayats or other contiguous areas, specified by the 
Governor by public notification to be a Metropolitan area for the purposes of this Part” Section 503B of the 
KMC Act provides that:  (1) The Government shall constitute a Metropolitan Planning Committee for e 
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 113  notified for the constitution of the Metropolitan Planning Committee is the 1219 sq. km. Bangalore 
Metropolitan Area  (excluding NICE) under the jurisdiction of the Bengaluru Development Authority 
(BDA) and not the 8 ,000 sq. km Bangalore Metropolitan Region coming under the jurisdiction of the 
Bengaluru Metropolitan Region Development Authority (BMRDA).  
As the spatial growth of Bengaluru goes beyond the boundaries of present city, the area currently covered by the BDA and  MPC does not accurately represent the metropolitan region of Bengaluru. The 
Kasturirangan Committee had recommended that the MPC have jurisdiction over the territorial area presently covered by BMRDA which includes the districts of Bengaluru Urban, Bengaluru Rural and Ramanagaram. Considering Bengaluru’s projected urban growth, we are also of the opinion that the MPC be constituted for the entire Bangalore Metropolitan Region of 8000 sq.km.  As explained in Part I of this 
chapter, for the 1307  sq.km. of me tropolitan area, the Greater Bengaluru Authority will be the planning 
body.  
4.15 COMPOSITION OF METROPOLITAN PLANNING COMMITTEE
4.15.1 Current Set up  
The amendment to the KMC Act in 1994 provided for the establishment of a Metropolitan Planning Committee and specifies  its composition. Section 503B of the KMC Act provides for the 
composition of the MPC to consist of 30 persons, including elected representatives from 
municipal councils and town panchayats and nominated representatives of the Central and State 
Government.   Further, the Bangalore Metropolitan Planning Committee Rules, 2013 provides 
that the 30 members be constituted in the following manner:  
(a) Ten members nominated by the State Government (including the chief ministers, urban 
development minister and officials of government bodies)  
(b) Twenty elected members from urban and rural bodies within the metropolitan area of which 
eighteen members are from BBMP and Municipalities and 2 members elected by and from the 
Panchayats.  
Additionally, two persons who are e minent Economists or professionals with experience in 
Town Planning are nominated by the State Government as special invitees. All MLAs and MPs 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Bengaluru  Metropolitan Area to prepare a draft development plan for such area as a whole.Explanation. - For 
the purpose of this section " Bengaluru  Metropolitan area" means an area specified by the Governor to be a 
metropolitan area under clause (c) of Article 243P of the Constitution of India.  
 
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 114  whose constituencies lie within the Bangalore Metropolitan area shall be permanent invitees. 
While the Commissio ner of the BDA will be the member secretary who shall convene the 
meetings of the committee, the Rules provide that the Chairperson  of the committee shall be 
chosen from among the members . 
4.15.2 Alternatives Considered  for MPC  
In considering the ideal compositio n of the MPC, we will need to consider its optimal size as well as 
the manner in which its members are elected/selected. Some options that we considered were the proposals of the Kasturirangan Committee Report and the model for the MPC in Kolkata.  
Kasturirangan Committee Report : The Kasturirangan Committee Report suggested that 30 
members was inadequate to represent the proposed larger metropolitan region of 8000 sq.km (instead of 1300 sq.km).  In order to give adequate representation to the various  locally elected 
bodies in this vast territorial area, the Kasturirangan Committee suggested that the MPC should have 63 members of which 42 would be elected and the rest nominated. It provided that the elected 
members be elected from the 3 electoral segments comprising of  
(1) Corporators of BBMP,  
(2) Councillors of the other urban municipalities and  
 (3) the Chairpersons of the Gram Panchayats, Taluk Panchayats and Zilla Panchayats  
Out of the 21 seats for nominated members, 10 may be provided for MLAs, M LCs and MPs. The 
remaining 9 nominations may be made from one representative each of manufacturing industry, 
service industry, trade and commerce, real estate industry; one individual each with expertise on environmental affairs, education or health, urban  planning, law; and a Metropolitan Commissioner, 
who will also be the Member- Secretary of the MPC, not below the rank of Principal Secretary to 
Government of Karnataka. 
Kolkata Metropolitan Planning Committee : The West Bengal Metropolitan Planning Committe e 
Act, 1994 provides for the constitution of the Kolkata Metropolitan Planning Committee (KMPC) 
which comprises of 60 members. Forty members are elected from amongst the Councillors of the Urban Local Bodies and chairpersons of the panchayats included in the Kolkata Metropolitan Area 
and 20 are nominated members.  Of the 40 elected members, 34 members are from the 
municipalities/corporations and 6 are from the panchayats included in the Metropolitan Area. The 20 nominated members are made up of representatives of the government including the Chief Minister who shall be the Chairperson of the committee and the Minister of Urban Development who 
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 115  shall be the Vice- Chairperson.  It also provides for an Executive Committee for the KMPC which is 
headed by the Mini ster of Urban Development.  Its members include the mayors of Kolkata, Hooghly 
and Chandannagar, which are the three Corporations in the KMPC. It also includes the ZP Chairmen 
of the panchayats included in the KMPC.  
 The executive committee coordinates th e development activities within the KMPA on behalf of the 
KMPC. The Executive Committee reviews and monitors the work of all the 5 Sectoral Committees dealing with the following Sectors: (a) Water Supply; (b) Drainage, Sewerage & Sanitation; (c) Traffic and Transportation; (d) Environment, Wetlands, Heritage etc.; and (e) Health, Education, 
Employment and Slum. Each of the Sector Committees is to prepare a sectoral Master Plan/Development Plan that would lay down the strategies of development in each sector  and also 
identify the major schematic interventions needed in each sector over a period of time. The Executive 
Committee finalizes the sectoral plans and submits them to KMPC for approval.  
4.15.3 Recommendation  for MPC  
There is currently not enough evidence on  the workings of MPCs for there to be a considered analysis 
of the optimal composition or functions of MPCs.  One reason for MPCs not being functional in most 
cities could be that the MPCs do not have a mandatory statutory role.  The primary initial challe nge 
with MPCs is to get them underway. Considering the proposal by Kasturirangan Committee and the experience of Kolkata, we feel the MPC shall have be constituted by a larger number of members to represent a wide array of interests, in the light of its increased territorial jurisdiction.  We would recommend an MPC comprised of 60 members on the terms set out below. The composition of the MPC should have a statutory basis and the KMC Act should accordingly be amended to introduce the following provision:  
Composition of the Metropolitan Planning Committee : 
(1) The Metropolitan Planning Committee for the Bangalore Metropolitan Area shall consist of  a 
maximum of  sixty members.  
(2) Not less than forty of such members shall be elected by and from amongst the elected 
members of the Municipalities and the Adyakshas and Upadyakshas of Zilla Panchayat, Taluk 
Panchayat and Grama Panchyats within the metropolitan area in proportion to t he ratio between 
the population of the Municipalities and of the Panchayats of that area. The election shall be held 
by the Karnataka State Election Commission.  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 116  (3)  A maximum of twenty of such members shall be shall be nominated by the state government 
and shall include:  
i. The Chief Minister, who shall be the Chairperson of the Committee  
ii. The Minister for Urban Development, who shall be the Vice -Chairperson of the 
Committee  
iii. Commissioner, Bangalore Metropolitan Region Development Authority, who shall be the 
Member Secretary of the Committee  
iv. Metropolitan Commissioner, Greater Bengaluru Authority  
v. Commissioner, Bangalore Development Authority  
vi. The Principal Secretary to Government, Urban Development  
vii. A maximum of seven members who are experts with wide experienc e in the fields of 
urban planning, economics, law, ecology and other fields relevant for metropolitan 
governance 
viii. A maximum of seven members from the civil society who are active in civic issues through resident welfare associations, community based organizations, slum federations, chambers of commerce and industry and other such initiatives.  
(4) All the members of the House of the people and the State Legislative Assembly whose constituencies lie within the Bangalore Metropolitan area and members of the Cou ncil of States 
and the State Legislative council who are registered as electors in such area shall be permanent 
invitees.  
(5) The Bangalore Metropolitan Region Development Authority shall be the Secretariat to the 
Metropolitan Planning Committee and shall provide the Committee with all the necessary 
administrative support required in carrying out its functions.
 
4.16 FUNCTIONS OF THE METROPOLITAN PLANNING COMMITTEE  (MPC)  
Section 503B of the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976 provides that the MPC “shall p repare 
a draft development plan for the Bangalore metropolitan area as a whole…. The Chairman of the Metropolitan Planning Committee shall forward the development plan, as recommended by such Committee, to the State Government.” The functions of the Metrop olitan Planning Committee are set 
out in further detail in the Bangalore Metropolitan Planning Committee Rules, 2013.  
For the MPC to work as an effective institution, its scope and functions need a stronger legislative basis with greater clarity about its objectives and manner of working. Based on the constitutional and 
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 117  statutory provisions, the MPC Rules, various proposals for reforms and provisions of legislations of 
other cities, it is suggested that the following provision be introduced to institutional ize the functions 
of the MPC:  
Functions of the Metropolitan Planning Committee:  
(1) The Metropolitan Planning Committee shall, within two years of its constitution, prepare and 
publish a 5 year regional development plan, which fairly integrates the intere sts of all geographic 
regions, for the Bangalore Metropolitan Region as a whole and repeat this exercise for 
subsequent five year periods.   
(2) The Metropolitan Planning Committee shall exercise the powers of the State Planning Board 
in accordance with the provisions of the Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act, 1961 for co-
coordinating and supervising the local planning authorities in the Bangalore Metropolitan 
Region in connection with the preparation of the various plans.  
(3) The Metropolitan Planning Committee shall formulate guidelines for compliance for the local 
planning authorities under Bangalore Metropolitan Region for preparation of master plans, 
spatial plans and any other urban plans.  
(4) An executive committee, headed by the Member Secret ary of the Metropolitan Planning 
Committee and maximum of 7 members elected by and from amongst of members of the 
Metropolitan Planning Committee, shall constitute five Sectoral Committees dealing with the 
following Sectors:  
(a) Spatial Planning  
(b) Infrastructure and Transportation  
(c) Environment and Ecology  
(d) Heritage, Arts and Tourism  
(e) Urban Poverty  
(5) Each Sectoral Committee has to prepare a 5 year Development Plan that would lay down the 
strategies of development in each sector and identify the major schematic interventions needed in 
each sector over a period of time.  
(6) The executive committee shall review and monitor the work of all the 5 Sectoral Committees, finalize the sectoral plans and submit them to the Metropolitan Planning Committee fo r approval.  
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
A THREE -TIER GOVERNA NCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
Page : 118  (7) The Metropolitan Planning Committee shall, in preparing the draft regional development 
plan, have regard to,- 
(i) the plans prepared by the local authorities in the Metropolitan area;  
(ii) the sectoral plans submitted by the Executive Committee;  
(iii) matters of common interest between the local authorities including co -ordinated spatial 
planning of the area, sharing of water and other physical and natural resources, the 
integrated development of infrastructure and environmental conservation;  
(iv) the overall  objectives and priorities set by the Government of India and the State 
Government;  
(v) the extent and nature of investments likely to be made in the Metropolitan area by 
agencies of the Government of India and of the State Government and other available 
resou rces whether financial or otherwise;  
 
(8) The Member Secretary of the Committee shall publish the draft regional development plan 
and display it in the offices of the local authorities in the Metropolitan area for a period of 30 days soliciting objections and suggestions  
 (9) The objections and suggestions received by the Secretary, in this regard shall be presented to the Executive Committee and the Executive Committee shall consider the same and suggest 
modifications to the plan.   
(10) After reviewing the modifications suggested by the Executive Committee, the Metropolitan 
Planning Committee shall finalize the regional development plan and forward it to the Governmen t
 
  
 
 
 
  
Page : 119A THREE -TIER GOVERNANCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
 
4.17 SUMMARY  OF RECOMMENDATIONS  
Wards  
Ward Committees are to be comprised of a combination of members selected on the basis of proportional 
representation that reflects the party vote share in the municipal elections and members nominated from 
civil society. The Area Sabha representatives and Ward -level heads of government departments and 
parastatals agencies involved in servi ce delivery in the ward shall be invitees to meeting of  the Ward 
Committee.  
Ward Committees are to be vested with greater powers under the statute in order to be able to d ischarge 
their accountability function more effectively. These powers should include planning powers, 
administrative and supervisory powers as well as powers over the finances allocated to the Ward. Ward 
Committees will also be responsible for preparing  annual budget plans for their ward for incorporation 
into the overall municipal budget . 
The provisions for convening W ard committee meetings are to be made more stringent with greater civil 
society participation and mechanisms available for airing of grievan ces for failure to conduct Ward 
Committee meetings appropriately or at all.  
The ward is to be made the nodal point of city governance with all the key service providers of the corporation being available at the ward level. Wards are to be provided with suf ficient human resources 
and infrastructure to carry out their administrative functions effectively.  
Municipal Corporations  
Each Municipal Corporation shall have a directly elected Mayorin whom the executive power of the 
Corporation is vested.  The Mayor sh all be assisted by a Mayoral Committee consisting of the Mayor, 
Deputy Mayor and 12 other members nominated by the Mayor. The term of the Mayor and Mayoral 
Committee shall be for a fixed period of five years.  
Ward Committees, Zonal Committees, Mayors, Municipal Corporations and the Greater Bengaluru 
Authority shall be recognized as “Municipal Authorities” charged with responsibility of discharging the functions of the municipal corporation.  Standing Committees and the Commissioner shall not be 
designat ed as Municipal Authorities.  
Each Zone of a Municipal Corporation shall have a Zonal Committee headed by a Zonal Commissioner and consisting of all the councillors elected from the wards falling within that Zone.  
 
  
 
 
 
  
Page : 120A THREE -TIER GOVERNANCE FRAMEWORK FOR BENGALURU  
 
The Zonal Committee shall be made responsible for all activities that need to be carried out across multiple 
wards within the same Zone. The Municipal Corporation shall be made responsible for all activities that 
need to be carried out across zones within the same corporation.  
The number of Standing Committees for each Municipal Corporation shall be reduced from 12 to 3. The 
Standing Committee shall not carry out any executive functions and shall purely be vested with deliberative and oversight functions.  
Greater Bengaluru Authority  
A Greater Beng aluru Authority (GBA) should be constituted as a new tier of local government above the 
level of the municipal corporation, which woul d have jurisdiction over the 1300 sq kms  of the Greater 
Bengaluru Area that is currently under the jurisdiction of the Ban galore  Development Authority.  
The GBA will be headed by the Chief Minister and comprised of a combination of municipal government representatives, representatives from the various parastatal agencies providing essential services in the 
Greater Bengaluru Area and few nominated experts.  
The principal functions of the GBA will involve planning for the Greater Bengaluru Area, coordinating the 
activities of various municipal corporations and parastatal agencies and administering municipal 
functions that have a m etropolitan wide impact.  
The functioning of parastatal agencies will be integrated with municipal government at the level of the 
GBA and also with the lower tiers of municipal government, including at the zone and ward level.  All key 
parastatal agencies (BWSSB, BDA, BMTC , BMRCL, BESCOM ) will come under the direct con trol of the GBA.  
                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
 ACT IVITY MAPPING  
Page : 121  5 ACTIVITY  MAPPING 
In any multilevel organization set up there are sound principles about where a particular kind of activity 
is best executed based on an assessment of citizen interface, criticality, need for proximity, externalities, discretion and economies of scale. This  kind of exercise has been undertaken in the Panchayat Raj 
department in India. The research on global cities with a population of over eight million indicated that these cities had organized services at different levels based on Activity mapping. It was felt that a similar exercise for the proposed restructuring of BBMP would be very useful in setting out roles and responsibilities at various levels, determining human resource requirements in terms of job description, 
numbers and scope for use of technology in the process.  
5.1 ACTIVITY  MAPPING  
5.1.1 Activity Mapping and its Objectives
 
The starting point for a decentralized system is the assignment of clearly defined roles to each level of 
government. Clarity in the functions of various levels of the government ensu res efficiency in service 
delivery and allows the citizen to hold the relevant agency accountable. In order to bring in role clarity, an 
activity mapping exercise is undertaken. Activity mapping exercise is a process of unbundling the various activities of  local government into different activity dimensions and using a logical framework to assign 
each activity to the relevant level of local government. 
The objectives of the activity mapping exercise undertaken by the C ommittee :  
•To identify all the requirements of a citizen of Bengaluru from different civic agencies (BBMP and 
Others)  
•To list the activities performed by different service providers/agencies in order to meet the citizen 
requirements  
•To identify the decentralized level at which each activity is best performed with respect to various 
dimensions of that activity  
•To slot the citizen interface of each activity at the lowest possible level  
•To help align the administrative, legal, spatial, financial and administrative aspects of the proposed BBMP restructuring.  
 
                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
 ACT IVITY MAPPING  
Page : 122  5.2 ACTIVITY  MAPPING  FRAMEWORK 
 
The first step to prepare an activity mapping framework was to unb undle the activities of the various 
agencies (sourced from web site, charters, Rules, Acts, department, etc.)  into different activity 
dimensions. Each Activity was divided into six activity dimensions which are as follows - 
 
•Technical standards setting : Most activities need a standardized process that determines how the 
activity is to be undertaken. For example, how does one design and build a road, a footpath, the storm 
water drain, fill a pothole, collect, transport, process and dispose garbage, etc. This is what Technical 
standard setting is about. This is ideally done centrally (we are advocating a Central Process Unit – 
CPU) that sets out standards, process, approach, etc. so that multiple folks do not need to reinvent the wheel. There could be some instances where this can be done at a decentralized level when they do n ot 
need major technical inputs  
•Service level promise: This is the promise made  by the folks who need to deliver on the promise and 
have the authority to make it happen. An example of this is time taken to give a birth or death certificate; time for khata transfer, building plan clearance, etc. Ideally this is more likely to be anch ored at the decentralized level  
•Planning : This is about Planning for the activity. Examples could piped water supply, pothole fixing, 
storm water drains, etc. It needs to be  anchored with the agency that has the budget and r esponsibility 
for the activity  
•Asset creation : Who will create the asset and have responsibility for the project will determine where 
it is housed. For example, major arterial roads will be at the Greater Bengaluru Authority level while 
Dry Waste Collections centres could be at the Zonal level  
•Operation and Maintenance (O&M): This as the term implies is about the level which has 
responsibility for regular opera tions and maintenance activity  
•Monitoring : The monitoring of an activity should always be allotted to an authority at an equal or 
higher level compared to the level which is tasked with the job. If at the same level, it needs to be 
overseen by a superior grade officer. Thus, the Operation and management of dry waste collection is at 
the Ward level. But the monitoring of this activity should be carried out at the Zone level.  
 
  
                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
 ACT IVITY MAPPING  
Page : 123  The levels at which the activities could be undertaken within the proposed 3 tier structure:  
•GBA  – Greater Bengaluru Authority (Tier 1) which has the parastatals  and is responsible for Planning, 
Plan enforcement, Large infrastructure, Coordination, Integration of parastatals and Economic 
Development  
•MC – Municipal Corporation (Tier 2A). Municipal Corporation is a set of Zones each of which consists 
of a set of Wards. There will be multiple municipal corporations  
•Zone  – Zones (Tier 2B). A Zone is a set of wards to cater to the needs of the wards un der its 
jurisdiction  
•Ward  – The lowest unit of governance (Tier 3).  
 
In addition certain activities were mapped to the State, External - typically Technical standards specified 
elsewhere -eg. RTI, Electricity regulations).  CPU (Central Process Unit) is the custodian of norms and 
standards for all processes. The activities were classified by citizen benefit (eg. Property, Information, 
Water, Garbage, etc.). The role of the Ward Committee and the scope for use of technology was also 
mapped.  
The activity map framework used six parameters (covering Service Delivery, Accountabilit y and Public 
Finance dimensions) which were the g uiding principles for slotting an activity to a part icular level of 
government:  
• Citizen interface : If the citizen directly avails the service, the tendency would be to place the 
activity lower down the hierarchy  
• Criticality : Higher the criticality of the service from a citizen perspective, lower the hierarchy at 
which the activity should be perform ed 
• Proximity: Higher the proximity between the service provider (agency) and the service recipient 
(citizen), lower the hierarchy at which activity should be performed  
• Externalities : If there are externalities, the tendency would be to place the activi ty higher up the 
hierarchy  
• Discretion : Higher the discretion required at the point of service delivery, lower the hierarchy at 
which activity should be performed;  
• Economies of Scale : Higher the economies of scale, higher the hierarchy at which the activity 
should be performed.  
                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
 ACT IVITY MAPPING  
Page : 124  None of the above six guiding principles can be applied in isolation. The six parameters need to be seen as 
a whole for a meaningful analysis. In addition, the following considerations also affect the placement of 
the activity:  
• Capacity issues (however, capacity gaps can be addressed over time)  
• Availability of finance (however, finance must follow activity rather than the other way round)  
• IT enablement (most activities can be IT enabled over the long term influencing the performance of 
the activity).  
Limitations of this Activity Mapping  
The activity mapping exercise carried out by the C ommittee has tried to create detailed listing assigning 
of activities at various levels. However, this exercise has certain limitations which are listed below - 
• The list of over 650  activities covered in the Activity Map while considerable, is not necessarily 
exhaustive.  
• The list also does not have the concurrenc e of the individual agencies as yet. This is proposed t o be 
done through sensitization workshops where the BBMP Restructuring philosophy is explained 
along with context on the importance of Activity mapping and how it was done. The individual 
agencies / de partments need to use this mapping as a starting base and refine it.   
• The six parameters (citizen interface, criticality, proximity, externalities, discretion, economies of 
scale) and the six activity dimensions (technical standards setting, service level  promise, planning, 
asset creation, operation and maintenance, monitoring) do not lend themselves to rule- based 
analysis and conclusions. They have to  be seen in the context of the A ctivity being discussed. For 
example, the activity ‘Flood relief’ scores high on the parameters of Criticality as well as Proximity tending to move the activity towards ward level. However, the Planning for flood relief is ideally done at the Zone level since there are Externalities and the activity affords opportunities for achieving Economies of Scale.  There is some subjectivity to be handled case to case to finally decide 
what activity is best done at what level.  
Outcome of the Activity Mapping  
This exercise is expected to yield the following benefits to various stakeholder g roups  
•Strengthen the presence of each agency at Ward level 
•Increase the role of the Councillor  and the Ward Committee as citizen representatives in getting the 
services delivered by the agencies  
•Facilitate inter -agency coordination at the GBA level 
                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
 ACT IVITY MAPPING  
Page : 125  •Bring c larity on the responsibility for delivering services amongst different agencies and different 
levels within an agency  
•Establish an effective activity monitoring and performance management system thereby improving 
accountability towards the citizens  
•Help each agency in reorganizing its internal setup and functioning in order to enable the 
performance of activities at the desired levels  
•Fix accountability at each levels in case of failure to deliver services  
•Help in amending the governing Acts and Rules to align them to the desired agency -activity 
levels  
•Establish clear service delivery standards and help assess performance against promises.  
 
Sample examples  
 The Output of the internal exercise undertaken by  the Committee is set out in  Appendix  III. A sample of a 
few ac tivities is set out in Exhibit 5  A. 
   Next steps  
The exercise undertaken by the Committee is to be considered a start on the journey of Activity mapping. 
It does not claim to be exhaustive. It finally needs to be done and owned by the agencies  concerned. Our 
suggestion is to hold a series of workshops with the civic agencies where the background about the proposed restructuring is given and the need for the Activity mapping is explained. This is followed by understanding the basis of classifying the Activities, reviewing the initial set already done and making any 
modifications / additions / deletions as needed. The finalized Activity mapping needs to finally find its 
place in the process and job description documents of the agencies.     
 
                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
 ACT IVITY MAPPING  
Page : 126  Exhibit 5  A 
Sample cases: Activity Mapping  
Citizen  
Requirement  Activity  Service  
Provider  Technical  
Standards  
Setting  Service  
level  
Promise  Planning  Asset  
Creation  O&M  Monitoring  IT  
Scope?  Ward  
Committee  
Property  Providing Khatha  
Allotment services  BBMP –  
Revenue  CPU  MC N/A  N/A  Ward  Zone  Yes No 
Birth & Death Issue of Birth &  
Death Certificates  BBMP  CPU  MC N/A  N/A  Ward  Zone  Yes No 
Roads  Construction & maintenance  
of Arterial RoadsBBMPEngineering  
– Roads  CPU  GBA  GBA  GBA  GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Regulation  Action against building  
ViolationsBBMP – 
Town PlanningMC MC Zone  N/A  Ward  Zone  Yes No 
Welfare  Establishment & operating  
Anganwadis  BBMP – Welfare  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward  Zone  Yes Yes 
Garbage  Collection of Solid Waste  BBMP – SWM  MC MC Zone  N/A  Ward  Zone  No No 
Layouts  Approval of development plans  
for group housing & layouts  BDA  CPU  GBA  GBA  N/A  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Preparation of Master/  
Development Plan  BDA  External  N/A  GBA  GBA  N/A  GBA  Yes No 
Public Transpo  Implementation of Intelligent  
 Transport Systems  BMTC  CPU  N/A  GBA  N/A  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Water  Establishment & maintenance  
of water supply networkBWSSB  CPU  GBA  Zone  Zone  Ward  Zone  Yes Yes 
Traffic  Setting up & operating signals  
& sign boards  Traffic Police  CPU  N/A  Zone  Zone  Ward  Zone  Yes No 
Energy  Provision of new connections to  
 domestic, commercial,  
industries, agriculture usersBESCOM  CPU  GBA  Zone  Zone  Ward  Zone  Yes No 
Safety & Securit  Registration of First Information  
 Report  Bangalore Police State  GBA  N/A  N/A  Ward  Zone  Yes No 
    
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 127  6HUMAN  RESOURCES  MANAGEMENT  
Any attempt to reform urban governance in Bengaluru would be incomplete without strengthening the 
institutional capacity of the municipal government, especially in the context of the creation of a new three -tier governance framework with smaller city corporations. Presently, the BBMP recruits its staff 
based on outdated C&R Rules and depends heavily on deputed staff, both of which have seriously undermi ned the quality of manpower available to govern the city. The BBMP also faces an acute 
shor tage of manpower with about a third of the sanctioned posts (excluding pourakarmikas) remaining 
vacant. Unless these challenges are addressed on priority, it is impo ssible to bring about any qualitative 
change in the governance of Bengaluru. A number of expert committees have emphasised the urgent need for capacity building in municipal administration in India. In its report on “India’s Urban Awakening: Building Inclu sive Cities, Sustaining Economic Growth”, McKinsey Global Institute (2010) 
states that “many states and cities have been unable to leverage available funds or implement reforms because of a lack of local capacity and technical expertise”. The High Powered Expert Committee on Indian Urban Infrastructure and Services (2011) and the Planning Commission’s Working Group on Capacity Building for the Twelfth Plan (2011) have also identified the need to strengthen the capacity of municipal governments for effective  service delivery.  In the case of Bengaluru in particular, 
Kasturirangan Committee (2008) which studied governance in Bengaluru Metropolitan Region has made a series of recommendations to modernize and strengthen the BBMP’s administrative capacity.  
 This chapter examines the BBMP’s human resource challenge and how it can be addressed. The chapter 
is organized into four parts. Part 1 examines the current organizational and staffing patterns of the 
BBMP. Part 2 identifies the various challenges in the organization of administration and manpower. Part 
3 presents the changes required in the present s ystem to develop competent and professional 
manpower in the proposed in three -tier governance framework . Part 4 presents  the proposed changes 
department -wise.  
6.1 PART  1 – THE  ADMINISTRATIVE  STRUCTURE  
The BBMP ’s administrative structure  is organized at the central, zonal and ward levels ( See Exhibit 6 
A). While  policy and planning decisions are taken at the head office level , maintenance and service 
delivery functions are planned and executed at the zonal level and below. The BBMP functions through 
12 departments, viz., General Administration, Accounts, Revenue, Health, Engineering, Horticulture, Forests, Welfare, Education, Advertisement, Legal Cell and Estat es.  
    
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 128  6.1.1 Administration at the Head-office level  
At the head office level, t he BBMP’s administrative structure (non- elected) is headed by the 
Commissioner with f ive Additional /Special Commissioners currently reporting to the commissioner. 
The Commissioner is a ppointed by the State Government in consultation w ith the Mayor . The 
Commissioner is an IAS officer of the rank of Principal Secretary to the State Government and as per the 
Karnataka Municipal Corporation Act, 1976; the Commissioner is vested with the executive powers of 
the Corporation. This is followed by a direct reporting line of Special and Additional c ommissioners at 
the head office.At present, the BBMP has two special commissioners and three additional 
commiss ioner s - Special Commissioner (Projects), Special Commissioner (Resources and Finance), 
Additional Commissioner (Admin istration ), Additional Commissioner (Health and Solid Waste 
Management) and Additional Commissioner (Welfare). All 12 departments  of the B BMP and various 
cells, wi ngs and projects under these departments  are organized under the charge of these five officials 
who report to the Commissioner. The Special/Additional Commissioners are also from the IAS.  
6.1.2  Administration at the Zonal level  
A  Zonal  Commissioner/ Joint Commissioner heads the zonal level administration at each of the eight 
zones of the BBMP and reports to the Commissioner.  The Zonal Commissioners are vested with 
executive powers in their jurisdiction.  The departments which have their offices at the zonal level are: 
Revenue, Finance, Engineering (including Town Planning), Horticulture, and Health (including Animal Husbandry), Advertisement and Education . Each of these departments is represented by a zonal head 
whose designation var ies a cross departments. The Z onal heads of the departments reports to the Zonal 
Commissioner. A Zonal Deputy Commissioner assists the Zonal Commissioner on revenue, elections and administration related matters.  
6.1.3 Administration below Zonal level: Divisions, Sub D ivision and Wards  
Below the zonal level, there are 30 divisions which  approximately overlap with 28 Legislative Assembly 
constituencies.   Each division comprises 2 -3 sub -divisions. Further down, each sub -division comprises 
2-4 wards. There are a total of 198 wards.  At the division, sub -division and ward levels,  departments of 
revenue, engineering and health  have their staff . Rest of the departments operate from the head office 
and/or the zonal offices.  The organisational str ucture at the zonal level is giv en in Exhibit 6B. 
6.1.4 Current Staffing  
The BBMP has a staff strength of 9917 as against the total sanctioned strength of 19,223 posts for the 12 departments. There are four categories of staff working in the BBMP. They are: (i) officers of the All India Servic e and the State Civil Service who occupy senior administrative positions, (ii) staff directly 
recruited as BBMP employees, (iii) staff on deputation from the state government departments and (iv) 
    
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 129  outsourced employees. There are over 500 employees on deputation mostly in the departments of 
engineering, forests and horticulture. The outsourced employees are mainly pourakarmikas  (sanitary 
workers) and data entry operators. Based on the number of sanctioned and working posts, the Health 
Department is the largest department with a total working strength of 1423 (excluding pourakarmikas ). 
Currently, the number of working staff is below the sanctioned s trength in almost all departments.  
 The following is a brief description of the functions of the 12 departments:  
 
•Administration : In charge of all service matters of the BBMP staff such as recruitment, training, and 
disciplinary actions.  Besides, it curren tly looks after elections, statistics and land acquisition 
matters.  
•Accounts : In charge of all matters relating to budget; salary, pension and PF;  revenue , certification 
of accounts, settlement of audit objections and so on.  
•Revenue:  In charge of a ssessme nt and collection of property tax, which is the main source of 
revenue for the BBMP.  It is also in charge of issuance of khata (private property records), 
amalgamation/bifurcation of khatas  and matters relating to property dispute s. 
•Health : In charge of public health and the BBMP’s hospitals. The public health wing issues trade 
licenses, monitors the outbreak of infectious diseases, sanitary measure in markets, eateries, 
factories and slaughter houses. It is also in charge of registration of births and deat hs. 
•Engineering: The Engineering Department has a number of wings such as Projects, Storm Water 
Drain, Road Infrastructure, Town Planning, Lakes and Technical Vigilance.  The Town Planning wing 
is responsible  for framing  building bye -laws, monitoring violation of building by -laws, and issuing 
plan sanction, commencement certificates and occupancy certificate for buildings. It also plays an advisory role on issues of town planning and transfer of developmental rights. The projects wing operates in the head office and deals with the major works across the city while other wings  are 
responsible for implementation  and maintenance  works  in their respective domains. The quality 
control wing inspects and certifies the quality of the engineering works taken up by the BBMP. Solid 
Waste Management is also under the Engineering department. However, now it is being carved out into a separate department. 
•Horticulture:  Maintains public parks and greenery in traffic islands.  
•Forests : Issu es tree licenses, maintains trees and urban forests; plants saplings to increase the 
green cover of the city.  
    
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 130  •Welfare:  In charge of spending the mandatory budgetary allocation for SC/STs. It also runs 
programs for women, physically handicapped and other di sadvantaged sections.  
•Advertisement:  In charge of  regulating and collecting advertisement tax for hoardings in private 
properties.  
•Legal Cell:  Provides legal opinion sought by various departments and legal services with respect to 
all court cases involving  the BBMP.  
•Education:  In charge of BBMP ’s schools and play grounds. The BBMP has 152 educational 
institutions ranging from nursery to degree colleges, and 153 play grounds.  
•Estates:  Maintains the records of all the public land owned by the BBMP.  
 
These departments together cover almost all the functions of urban local bodies as listed in the 12th 
Schedule of Constitution, except water supply, land use regulations and planning, which in Bengaluru 
are undertaken by the BWSSB and the BDA respectively.  
6.2 PART  2: THE  CURRENT  MANPOWER  CHALLENGES
The BBMP’s administrative system presented in the previous section is characterized by serious 
deficiencies. Its capacity to meet the growing challenges of the city’s governance is grossly inadequate. 
The capacity gap and  the factors responsible for it are discussed in detail in this part.  
6.2.1 Capacity Gap  
•Shortage of Staff : The BBMP is acutely understaffed. Of the total sanctioned strength of 19,223 
posts, 9307 (nearly 50 per cent) are vacant. This problem is addressed partly  by hiring contract staff, 
especially in the Solid Waste Management wing where contractual pourakarmikas  constitute over 80 
per cent of the total strength. However, even when we consider the number of vacancies sans 
pourakarmikas,  the overall vacancy level hovers around 35 per cent which is still quite high 
considering the growing problems of the city.  
•A department -wise analysis of the vacancy ( Fig 6a ) shows that almost all departments operate with 
less than the sanctioned number of employees. It should als o be noted that the existing sa nctioned 
strength itself has not been estimated based on any objective criterion such as physical capa city of 
the frontline staff and span of control of supervisory staff. A comprehensive HR mapping of the BBMP 
done by Bengaluru -based NGO Janaagraha with  Aon Hewitt ( 2014) has found that the sanctioned 
strength is significantly short in several departments  and that it fails  to meet the nationally 
prescribed norms for a number of the key posts . 
 
    
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 131  Department  Sanctioned 
Posts  Working 
Employees  Vacancy  Percentage of 
Vacancy  
General 
Administration    2,575   1,838     737 28%  
Accounts         93     92        1 1% 
Legal Cell  25 10 15 60%
Revenue    1,111    845    266 24%  
Forest           4     21     -17 --- 
Horticulture       964   452    512 53%  
Works    2,795   2,126     669 24%  
Health (excluding 
pourakarmikas)  2,719   1,423  1,296  47%  
Education  937 429 508 54%
Total * 11,223 7,236 3,987  35%  
Fig 6a : Department -wise vacancy position in the BBMP ; Source: BBMP  
A post -wise analysis of vacancy ( Fig 6a&b ) highlights the gravity of the situation as the vacancies are 
higher in such critical posts such as revenue officers/deputy revenue officers and assistant revenue 
officers in the Revenue Department, and Medical Officers of Health (MoH) and Auxiliary Nursing Midwives (ANM) in the Health Department. There is also a heavy shortage of ground -level operational 
staff such as gangmen in the Engineering Department and gardeners in the Horticulture Department. 
The overall vacancy position is highest in the law department, despite a two -fold increase in the number 
of pending cases (from 3257 in 2007 to 6957 in 2015). The shortage of revenue officers/deputy revenue officers is a whopping 90 per cent and this to a large extent explains the BBMP’s inability to 
adequately tap its vast revenue potential.
 
Department  Post  % of Vacancy  
Revenue  Revenue Officer/Deputy Revenue Officer  86%  
Revenue Inspector  29%  
Health  Medical Officer of Health  59%  
ANM  61%  
Works  Head Gangman  95%  
Gangman  50%  
Horticulture  Gardener  57%  
Fig 6b - Percentage of vacancy in Revenue, Health, Works and Horticulture department at middle and 
ground -level positions  
(All the figures are from the Addnl Com missioner –BBMP Administration)  
    
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 132  New areas were brought under the jurisdiction of the erstwhile Bangalore City Corporation to form the 
BBMP in 2007 without a corresponding increase in the staff strength. Although 1107 new posts were sanctioned to meet the requirements of the extended jurisdiction, most of them were not filled. The spatial distribution of the staff across the city is also highly skewed. Of the eight zones of the BBMP, the 
East and South Zones have much higher staff per population when compared to the remaining six zones 
of which five are in the newly added areas, as shown in Fig 6 c. 
Zone  Population 
2011Number of 
Staff  #  Staff per lakh 
population  
East  1,380,269  1,730  125 
South 2,049,337  3,842  187 
West  1,701,493     412 24 
Bommanahalli    880,161     562 64 
Dasarahalli     580,670     104 18 
Mahadevpura     703,443     538 76 
Rajarajeshwarinagar     410,213     354 86 
Yelahanka     738,089     582 79 
Fig 6c - showing the population and number of posts at the Zonal level  
(Source: Janagraha- Aon Study 2014)  
Besides the shortage of staff, a more serious aspect of the capacity gap is the lack of skills and 
competencies among the existing staff to meet the demands of their job. This has arisen primarily because of three reasons: (i) outdated C&R Rules; (ii) heavy dependence of deput ation and outsourcing; 
(iii) lack of induction and in -service training.  
Outdated C&R Rules:  The BBMP has been using C&R Rules framed over 45 years ago. Although these 
C&R Rules were revised in 2013 -14, the draft is yet to receive the state government’s approval. As a 
result, BBMP recruitments are governed by a set of outdated rules and procedures. These Rules do not 
take into account the requirement of skills and competencies among the staff to meet the current 
challenges of urban governance. They do not cover a large number of posts which have since been 
created in view of the newer responsibilities that the BBMP has come to shoulder under the 74th Constitutional Amendment and because of the manifold increase in  the city’s population.  The  Rules do 
not reco gnize the need for specialized knowledge to perform certain kinds of jobs in urban governance. 
For example:  Engineering department recruits general engineering graduates and then deploys them to 
departments where their roles  call for specialist knowledge. E ngineers with a civil engineering degree 
    
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 133  man town planning department where specialist skills of an urban planner is required. A study titled 
“Capacity Building for Urban Local Bodies in India“ conducted by the Indian Institute of Management 
(2013) makes the following observation about the Solid Waste Management(SWM)  Department:  
All engineers employed in the SWM department have an entry qualification of Bachelor in Engineering, 
with no particular specialization and have received no additional training. Ho wever, the national norms 
specify that the engineers employed in an SWM department must have a minimum qualification of a Bachelor in Public Health Engineering.  
The C&R Rules provide time -bound promotion of employees to higher level of posts, without 
presc ribing any additional qualification. Although passing a departmental examination is necessary for 
promotions, these examinations are conducted without much rigor. This has resulted in those with very low qualification occupying some of the key positions.  In the current set up, a person who has passed 
just class 10 can be promoted up to the rank of a deputy commissioner and one with a diploma in engineering can serve as an executive or superintend ent engineer.  
Dependence on Deputed Staff :  A number of impo rtant posts in the BBMP are being filled by way of 
deputation from various departments of the state government without ensuring that the staff so deputed possesses the required competence to discharge their responsibilities. While the overall number of dep uted staff constitutes less than 10 per cent of the total strength, it is important to note 
that the heads of all the key departments such as Engineering, Health, Forests, and Horticulture are recruited on deputation from the state government. Deputation is high in departments such as town planning (69 per cent) and engineering works department (53 per cent) . 
While deputation to some kind of posts may be unavoidable for reasons such as lack of expertise among 
the BBMP staff or difficulties in maintaining an  independent cadre for small departments, large  scale 
deputation in key departments such as works, town planning etc., has adversely affected the capacity of 
the administration a s admitted by senior officials of  the BBMP. The staff on deputation often lack s a 
sense of ownership and is  difficult to be held accountable.  
Inter -departmental issues: The key departments of the BBMP are not properly organized leading to a 
lack of effective top -level management and insufficient control over the lower level staff. For example, 
the resource -generating departments such as revenue, advertisements, markets etc., are not under a 
single head of the department. Often the difference between a department and a wing or a cell in a department is not clear. Different official documents list departments and organisational charts differently. The regulatory departments have poor enforcement capacity. Officials of the Markets 
    
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 134  Department admitted to their difficulties to revise the rentals or to recover the arrears as they faced 
threat from anti -social elements.  
Frequent Transfers : Section 14(1) of the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act says that a municipal 
commissioner will ‘….ordinarily hold office for a period not less than two years.” However i n the past 
five years, the BBMP has had six commissioners with terms ranging from four months to 18 months. 
Other key officials in the leadership position such as special commissioner and zonal commissioners also do not have security of tenure for them to undertake any systemic changes and reforms .
Lack of Induction and Training : While outdated C&R Rules and deputation of staff without relevant 
experience demand regular training and upgradation of skills among the working staff , there is no 
proper provision for training. The BBMP has a HR department which is not properly equipped to meet 
the professional training needs of the staff. The refresher programs that are conducted now are neither well organized, nor are they regular. No induction program is conducted for the newly recruited 
emplo yees and they are directly assigned responsibilities without training or orientation. Due to the 
lack of orientation and training, the dependency of new recruits on seniors even for procedural and 
administrative matters is high.  
6.3 PART 3 -OVERCOMING MANPOW ERCHALLENGES – ANEW AGENDA
For improving the governance of the city, the manpower challenges highlighted in the previous part 
needs to be addressed. In this part, we have given a road -map for restructuring and professionalizing 
manpower in the proposed t hree -tier governance framework for Bengaluru. First, manpower needs to be 
reorganized at the three proposed levels of administration – the Greater Bengaluru Authority (GBA), 
municipal corporations and wards as shown in the Exhibit 6C. Along with the reorga nization, a number of 
measures need to be initiated to professionalize and build the capacity of the staff.  
6.3.1 Reorganized Administrative Structure   
Administrative Structure at the GBA level : As part of the proposed reorganization of manpower, the 
departments  dealing with projects and functions which need to be carried out on a city -wide scale 
cutting across the boundaries of five proposed municipal corporations will be shifted to the Greater Bangalore Authority (GBA). A Metropolitan Commissioner will head the administration at the GBA. 
Accordingly , three departments from the corporation level need to be shifted to the GBA level. These 
are the Department of Town Planning, the Department of Projects and the Legal Cell. Along with these, the current parastatal agencies such as the Bangalore Development Authority and the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board will also be integrated with the GBA ’s administrative structure . At 
    
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 135  the GBA level, the Department of Town Planning will be renamed as the Department Planning and 
Development and will be headed by a Special Commissioner. The town planning functions of the BDA would be suitably merged with the Department of Planning and Development. The Department of Projects will be renamed as the Department of Major Projects and it will also be headed by a Special 
Commissioner. The Department of Major Projects will also include an e -governance unit to plan IT 
solutions for all five municipal corporations. The legal cell will be headed by a retired district and 
session’s  judge. The two special commissioners, the head of the legal cell and heads of the parastatal 
agencies will report to  the Metropolitan Commissioner.  
We also suggest  that the Technical Vigilance Cell of t he engineering department could be placed under 
the G reater Bengaluru  Services Ombudsperson which is proposed as an independent body at the GBA 
level. The staffing structure for the various departments at the GBA level needs to be assessed in a 
separate exercise.  
Administrative Structure at the Corporation level: With the shifting of some functions to the GBA 
as outlined above, the existing 12 Departments of the BBMP can be re -organized into nine 
departments with clearly defined functions  at the proposed corporatio n level. These nine departments 
and the rationale for their re -organization are given below.  
•Department of Resources : The existing departments of Revenue, Advertisement and Markets 
have been brought under a single department called the Department of Resources as all three deal with resource mobilization. This would enable the Municipal Corporation to take up well 
coordinated measures to maximize its revenue from all sources . Any other revenue generation 
function should also be under this department.  
•Department of Finance: At present the department of finance is under general administration.  In 
the proposed structure, the department of finance will be an independent department and all finance, accounts  and budget related functions should be brought under this  department.  
•Department of Works : This department would deal with all engineering related works (civil, 
mechanical and electrical) except those shifted to the GBA and other departments. With the 
shifting of overall planning function to the GBA, town planni ng functions at the corporation level 
will be limited to issuing building licenses and occupancy certificates. Hence the department of 
town planning at the corporation level may be dispensed with and the jurisdictional engineers may 
be allowed to sanction building plan s and occupancy certificate s. 
•Department of Health : The Department of Health currently deals with both public health and 
hospitals. The Animal Husbandry wing which deals primarily with animal birth control, and 
    
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 136  sanitation and licensing of slau ghter houses, is under the health department.  However, since the 
solid waste management is being moved out of the purview of this department, staffing needs to be 
rationalized.  
•Department of Solid Waste Management: This should be separated from the Health Department 
and organized as an independent Department as per the National Solid Waste Management Guidelines.  
•Department of Ecology and Environment :  All the functions relating to urban ecology and 
environment including parks, forests and lakes should be brought under one department – the 
department of Ecology and Environment. Currently Parks are under the Horticulture Department, Forests are under the Forest Department and Lakes are under a unit of the Engineering Department. Since, these three domains work  for the protection of the environment and 
promotion of ecological balance, they need to be brought under one department. 
•Department of Land  Management : Currently, the estates department manages the records of all 
public land records. In addition to this, BBMP has a land acquisition wing which is under general administration department. The public spaces such as play grounds are with the Education Department. Since urban land management is an area of vital importance, all these land -related 
functions should  be ideally brought under one department.  
•Department of Social Justice and Poverty Alleviation : The existing department of welfare, 
which is in charge of spending SC/ST funds and its ambit expanded in accordance with the mandate of the 12 th Schedule of the  Constitution. The 12th  Schedule lists “safeguarding the 
interests of weaker sections of society, including the ha ndicapped and mentally retarded “; and 
“urban poverty alleviation” as two distinct functions of the urban local bodies. Accordingly the welfare department may be renamed as the Department of Social Justice and Poverty Alleviation  
•Department of General Administration : In the reorganized set up the General Administration 
Department will encompass personnel, public relations, elections, IT cell, statistics, and council secretariat. The land acquisition wing which is currently under the General Administration has been mo ved to the Department of Land Management. With the shifting of the office of the legal cell 
which is currently under the General Administration to the GBA, individual corporations may have a smaller team of advocates. The strength of the team may vary depending on the number of pending cases.  
•Discontinuation of Education Department : In view of the minimal contribution of BBMP schools 
to the delivery of school level education in the city, we recommend that the BBMP education 
department be merged with the sta te government education department. It may be noted here 
    
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 137  that general education is not among the functions delegated to the urban local bodies under the  
12th Schedule of the Constitution . All the nine departments will have separate heads reporting 
directly  to the Municipal C ommissioner.  
Administrative Structure at the Zonal Level  
In the current set up, the departments of Revenue, Engineering (including town planning), 
Horticulture, Health (including Animal Husbandry), Finance, Advertisement and Education ha ve their 
offices at the zonal level. However, this is not a uniform arrangement across the eight zone s as some 
departments have no representations in some zones. In the proposed set up, we recommend that all the departments at the head office, except the general administration department; will have their 
operational wings at the zonal level. The zonal heads of these departments will report to the respective zonal commissioner. Further, we recommend that the post of the zonal deputy commissioner may be 
disco ntinued in view of the smaller jurisdiction of the zones and strengthening of the individual 
departments.  
Administrat ive Structure at the Ward Level  
In the existing set up, the departments of Engineering, Revenue and Health have their offices at the ward l evel.  The officials present at the ward level are Assistant/Junior Engineer, Tax Inspectors/Bill 
Collector and Health Inspectors. In the proposed structure, in addition to these, an environmental officer and a health inspector of the Solid Waste Management will also be present at the ward level. Further, the senior -most of the officials present at the Ward level will be designated as Ward Secretary 
to coordinate all works at the ward level. The Ward Secretary will report to the Ward Committee. The organisa tional chart in accordance with  the reorganized administrative structure at the GBA, 
Corporation Head Office, Zonal Office and Ward Level is shown in Exhibit 6N. 
6.3.2 Professionalization and Cadre & Recruitment Reforms  
Along with the restructuring and reorganization detailed in the previous section, the existing outdated 
Cadre and Recruitment Rules need to be revised to (i) provide fora stringent process to recruit staff at 
all levels and (ii) to minimise deputation from the state government and (iii) p rovide for lateral entry 
to select the best available talent from the public, private and non -profit sectors to manage the 
governance of the city. Below we discuss some of the major recommendations in this regard.  
Human Resources Cell : A Human Resources Ce ll should be set up  at the GBA level to oversee the 
entire process of recruitment, training, promotion and assessment of the staff  for all the five 
corporations, according to the revised C&R R ules.  Through a process of lateral entry and direct 
recruitment explained later in this section, the Cell should coordinate (i) the selection of professionals 
    
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 138  to the leadership roles in all the functional departments and (ii) recruitment and maintenance of 
independent city cadres in the following heads of municipal ser vices  
i. Municipal Administrative Service (for executive roles in personnel and administration)  
ii. Municipal Technical Service (in the functional areas of engineering, sanitation, urban planning 
and transportation, e -governance)  
iii. Municipal Finance Service (in the  functional areas of municipal finance, revenue and accounts)  
iv. Municipal Social Development Service (in the functional area of poverty alleviation and 
welfare)  
Some expert committees have suggested these municipal services at the state level. The Second 
Adm inistrative Reforms Commission  has, however,  favoured municipal -level recruitment of personnel, 
instead of a state- wide municipal cadre. Since the decision regarding creating state -level cadre s is to be 
taken by the union and  the state governments, we recommend that above mentioned services  be 
introduced in Bengaluru as city cadres. If and when  the state -wide cadre is  created, the city cadres in 
Bengaluru  may  be merged with it . Karnataka is one of the states which already has a generalist 
muni cipal administ rative service (KMA S). Members of this cadre may be allotted to municipal bodies 
other than those in Bengaluru.  However,  KMA S members may be considered for specific posts in 
Bengaluru Corporations through the selection process prescribed for the posts conc erned . 
Lateral Entry:  Lateral entry should be allowed to  the posts of the heads of department (leadership 
roles) which are currently held only by the IAS and State Civil Service officials. The se posts should be 
open to be filled by  domain experts outside the government. However, if such domain expertise is 
available within the existing central service or All India Service cadres they may be considered these posts  through an appropriate process of selection .  
Appointment of Commissioners and Zonal Commissio ners : T he posts of Metropolitan 
Commissioner  and Corporation Commissioners may continue to be filled by officials of the Indian 
Administrative Service borne on the Karnataka Cadre. However, instead of routinely posting IAS officers 
for these posts, those with considerable experience and training in urban governance should  be given 
preference.  
The posts of Zonal Commissioners are currently being filled by promoting BBMP officials or drawing on 
any state government service officials. We recommend that these posts should be filled only by senior Karnataka Administrative Service Officials with previous experience of having worked in urban local bodies. Their appo intment should also be subject to a process of selection in which relevant previous 
experience, training, interest and aptitude need to be ascertained.  
    
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 139  The rationale of having only the IAS and KAS officials for the posts of Commissioners and Zonal 
Commissioners respectively is that these are the posts which require the officers to coordinate with 
elected representatives and various departments both within the BBMP and in the State Government. These responsibilities can be better handled by the All India Services and State Civil Services officials as 
they are exposed to such roles from the beginning  of their career. A tenure of at least 2.5- 3 years is 
suggested. In due course one could consider lateral recruitments for these posts too.  
As mentioned earlier, we recommend that the heads of nine reorganized functional departments at the 
municipal corpo ration level, be drawn from a wider pool of talent in both private and public sectors. 
Specifically, we would like to make the following recommendations:  
• The post of the head of the resources in each corporation may be drawn from the Indian Revenue Service (IRS) with a proven record in revenue mobilization efforts.  
• The head of the finance department may be a chartered accountant or a member of Indian 
Accounts and Audit Service.  
• The head of the solid waste management unit may be an environmental engineer drawn from 
either public or private sector with considerable experience in solid waste management in India or abroad.  
• The head of the Engineering Department may be from among the cadre of corporation engineers or from a state government department but to be chosen from a panel of eligible candidates through a rigorous screening process.  
• The head of health department should be an expert in public health management. He or she may be chosen from within the corporation’s cadre of health officer or from the privat e sector.  
• The head of the department of forests, horticulture and lakes can be an urban environment specialist with considerable experience in managing urban ecology and environment. If the post is to be filled by drawing on Indian Forest Service Officials their training and experience 
relevant to the job and aptitude should be ascertained through a selection process.  
• The head of urban poverty alleviation department (currently welfare) can be a development specialist with considerable experience in planning, executing and evaluating poverty alleviation schemes in the non -governmental sector.  
• The head of the urban land management may be drawn from the State Department of Revenue or the Department of Survey, Settlement and Land Records.  
• The head of the administration department may continue to be an IAS officer or a senior KAS 
officer.  
    
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 140  Direct Recruitment : Along with the lateral entry for senior managerial posts, all other posts should 
be filled by direct recruitment or promotion.  Deputation to these posts should be discontinued except 
in those cases where it is difficult for the corporation to maintain a cadre of its own or when the corporation cannot find the requisite staff from within its cadres. Those coming on deputation must 
fulfil the minimum qualification and experience laid down for the post concerned. The C&R rules 
should clearly specify the ratio of direct recruitment and promotions with respect to each category of 
posts.  The promotions should  also  be through a process of selection as that of direct r ecruitment.  
Outsourcing Selection Process: The HR cell may outsource the candidate selection process to cent res 
of excellence such as Indian Institutes of Management in the cases of lateral entry to leadership roles 
and direct recruitment to key posts . The current model of recruitment enlisting the services of 
institutions outside the government followed by the BWSSB and KPTCL may be studied and followed. 
The recruitment of AROs and ROs may be assigned to the Indian Institute of Management as ROs and 
AROs a re key functionaries in managing resource mobilization at the field -level and hence are 
required to possess proper aptitude and competence required to carry out this function. Selection of candidates for various engineering posts may be outsourced to techn ical institutions of repute keeping 
in view the kind of specialization required for the posts being filled.  
Fixed Tenure for Commissioner:  The Section 14(1) of the KMC may be suitably amended to provide 
security tenure for the commissioner for at least two  (ideally three)  years. This would enable the 
commissioners to plan for long term improvements in governance and to reform the system without 
being constrained by political expediency.  
Induction and Training:  All the new recruits should go through mandator y foundation training as 
well as mid -career training as a pre- condition for promotion. Training can be  organized in partnership 
with  private institutions and  the Karnataka State Institute of Urban Development  which was 
established by the government with th e mandate to train municipal staff.  
6.3.3 Manpower Asses sments using Scientific Methods  
The manpower requirements at various levels and various categories of posts needs to be estimated 
using a scientific method such as the Destination Organization Chart (DOC) developed by Janagraha 
and Aon which allows required staff strength to be estimated  against specific volume of works to be 
executed in a given time frame. Any such estimate should also take into account the use of technology for upgrading various processes of administration. We suggest that a separate committee of experts 
should be const ituted to estimate the sanctioned strength of staff on a scientific basis.  
    
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 141  Performance Assessment 
A stringent annual performance review process should be in place and it should be done in a fair and 
transparent manner. The HR Cell should coordinate this pr ocess with the department heads and the 
head of administration department of the municipal corporation concerned . 
Human Resource Management System (HRMS):  IT-based management tools such as Human 
Resources Management System can be deployed to automate the t racking of staff data pertaining to 
skills, capabilities, performance appraisal, learning management, attendance and payroll. This can help 
reduce the manual workload of these administrative activities at the head office.  
Abolition of Posts:  A large number of posts both at the head office and zonal level, which have no 
relevance in the changed circumstances, need to be either abolished or redeployed. A list of over 100 
posts which could be abolished has been drawn as part of the draft revised C&R Rules of 2013- 14. 
6.4 PART  4:DEPARTMENT -WISE PRESENTATION  OF PROPOSED  CHANGE  
This section presents an overview of changes proposed in all the nine restructured department. The 
major changes recommended in Cadre and Recruitment Rules are also presented. 
6.4.1 Administration  
Major Changes Propo sed in Department: Administration (Exhibit 6D)  
•Head of Legal Cell moved to GBA  
•Number of Assistant Commissioner posts reduced and Deputy PRO abolished in view of smaller jurisdiction of the corporation  
•The Land Acquisition wing has been moved to the proposed Department of Land Managament  
Prop osed C&R Changes : Administration  
•For the post of  the PRO, direct recruitment should be preferred as opposed to current practice of 
deputation from the department of information of the state governmen t. Graduation  with at least 
five years experience in public relations and media should be the minimum qualification.  
•Method of recruitment and qualifications for all other posts  as per draft  revised C&R Rules 2013.  
6.4.2 Finance  
Major Changes in the Department : Finance  
The existing department of accounts has been renamed as department of finance. The organisation of 
the department continues as it exists as shown ( See Exhibit 6E) 
    
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 142  Major Changes in the Cadr e and Recruitment Rules:  Finance  
•Lateral entry may be allowed to fill the post of the head of this department  
•The head of the department should be chartered accountant with considerable experience in 
public or private sector organisation or a member of the Indian Accounts and Audit Service. 
•For other posts in  the department, the method of recruitment and promotion, and minimum 
qualification laid down in the revised Draft Cadre and Recruitment Rules 2014 may be followed. 
6.4.3 Resources  
Major Changes Propo sed in the Department : Resources(See Exhibit 6F ) 
The existing revenue generating departments of Revenue, Advertisement and the Markets wing to be 
integrated into a new department of Resources  
Major changes Proposed in the Cadre and Recruitment Rules: Resources  
Head of the Department : An IAS officer with considerable experience in resource mobilisation;  Or to 
be recruited through lateral entry or deputation fro m Indian Revenue Service (IRS).  
•Deputy Commissioners: I AS/KAS with suitable experience in urban governance/  promotion from 
the rank of BBMP ROs  
•AROs and ROs: Graduates in any discipline to be selected through a rigorous competitive 
examination. The process of selection may be outsourced to IIMB. A proportion of the posts may be 
reserved for BBMP Revenue Inspectors and other junior cadres subject to their cleari ng the 
ROs/AROs recruitment examination . 
•Method of recruitment and Qualifications for all other posts  as per draft C&R Rules 2013. 
6.4.4 Works  
Major Changes Proposed in the Department : Works (See Exhibit 6G  and 6H) 
•The Post of the Engineer -in-Chief to be discont inued  
•The Major Projects, Town Planning and TVCC wings to be shifted to the GBA. However, Corporation level projects including building plans and electrical works will be retained at the Corporation and Zonal levels  
•The Lakes wing to be shifted to the proposed Department of Ecology and Environment  
•The Solid Waste Management Wing to be shifted to the newly created SWM Department  
•The zonal head of the engineering department to be a Superintending Engineer instead of a chief engineer in view of (i) reduced  size of the zone (ii) separation of a number of functions currently 
    
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 143  handled by engineering wings to separate departments such as SWM and Ecology and 
Environment.  
•The engineering department at appropriate level to be vested with the powers to sanction buil ding 
plans and issue occupancy certificates since the Town Planning wing has been shifted to the GBA.  
Major Changes Proposed in the C&R Rules : Works  
•Head of the Department to be filled by way of promotion or lateral entry or deputation subject to a process  of selection.  
•Deputation of engineers at all others levels, from the PWD and other State Government Departments, to be discontinued unless under special circumstances approved by the GBA  or the 
Commissioner. All these posts to be filled either by way of p romotion or direct recruitment. Lateral 
Entry to be allowed in suitable cases.  
•The current practice of recruiting 30 per cent mechanical engineers to be discontinued. All posts to be filled by civil engineers unless the specific post requires a degree in mechanical engineering or other areas.  
•For all key positions in the Town Planning Department now slated to be located at the GBA level, a degree in urban planning should be made mandatory  
•Method of recruitment and Qualifications for all other posts  as per draft C&R Rules 2013 . 
6.4.5 Health  
Major Changes proposed in the Department : Health (See Exhibit 6I) 
•Solid Waste Manageme nt wing will be separated from H ealth  
•The Department of Animal Husbandry will be part of the H ealth departmen t 
•In view of the reduced work load (with shifting of SWM to a separate department) and the reduced size of the zone, there will be deputy health officer instead of a health officer at the zonal level  
•The number of senior health inspectors and junior health inspectors at the sub -divisio n and ward 
level needs to be rationalized as they are now primarily concerned only with public health and issuance of trade licenses.  
 
    
    
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 144  Major Changes Proposed in the C&R: Health  
•The head of the health department to be promoted from the cadre of BBMP health officers instead 
of deputation from the State Health Department. In case of deputation under unavoidable circumstances, it should be ensured that the candidate has suitable experience in public health. 
•Lateral entry to be considered for the Post of Dep uty Health Officer (Public Health) at the head 
office.  
•Deputation should be avoided as far as possible for all the posts.  
•Method of recruitment and Qualifications for all other posts  as per draft C&R Rules 2013. 
6.4.6 Solid Waste Management  
Major Changes Propos ed in the Department : SWM (See Exhibit 6J ) 
•This is a new Department to be set up under the Solid Waste Management Rules  
•Separate Senior Environmental Officers, Health Inspectors and Pourakarmikas to be in charge of managing Solid Waste generated in Households and Markets . 
•Separate Health Inspectors to be posted to deal with House and Bulk solid waste in in sub -
divisional and ward level  
•The spatial distribution of the personnel to be finalized based on a scientific study of the solid 
waste generation in a given area.  
Major Changes Proposed in the C&R Rules : SWM  
•Lateral entry should be allowed to fill the post of the head of the Solid Waste Management. A 
candidate with considerable managerial experience in Solid Waste Management in major cities in India or Abroad may be considered for the post.  
•For all technical posts from Environmental Officer up to the Superintending Engineer 
(Environment) a bachelor’s degree in environment engineering or public health engineering 
should be mandatory. Superintending Engineers post may be filled by promotion subject to this condi tion. The posts of Environmental Officers are to be filled through direct recruitment . The 
selection process may be outsourced to an institution of excellence in the field. 
6.4.7 Ecology and Environment  
Major Cha nges Proposed in the Department : Ecology &  Environ ment (See Exhibit 6K ) 
•The existing departments of Forests and Horticulture and the Lakes wing of the Engineering Department have been integrated to propose this new department. This has been done since all these three departments broadly deal with issues relating to ecology and environment in the city. 
    
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 145  Since three departments need to function in coordination and take decisions keeping an integral 
view of the urban ecology and environment an integrated department of ecology and environment is suggested  
Major  Changes Proposed in Cadre and Recruitment Rules : Ecology & Environment  
•Lateral entry may be allowed to fill the post of the head of this department.  
•If the  officials in the Indian Forest Service  are to be appointed then only those with exposure and 
exper ience in urban forestry and ecology should be considered.  
•Although a bachelor degree in civil engineering is to be the minimum qualification for engineers in the lakes wing of this department, preference should be given to those with additional qualificati on and experience in environmental engineering  
•For all other posts, the method of recruitment and minimum qualifications prescribed in the 
revised C&R Rules 2014 can be followed.  
6.4.8 Department of L and Management  
Major Changes in the Department : Land Management  (See Exhibit 6L ) 
•The existing Estates Department and the Land Acquisition Wing from the General Administration 
have been brought together to propose this department  
•Currently, the estates department manages the records of public. The records of the private land 
are held by the Revenue Department. Land acquisition for public purposes is managed by a separate wing attached to the Genera Administration Department. Management of both public and 
private land needs to be strengthened in the city and to  start this process an integrated land 
management department which combined all land management and land records management 
functions is necessary. Another reason for proposing this department is that with the proposed 
discontinuation of the education department, a number of play grounds also need to be managed.  
Major Changes in t he Cadre and Recruitment Rules : Land Management  
•Key posts in this department including head of the department may be on deputation from the 
Revenue Department or from the Survey Settlement and Land Records (SSLR) of the State Government  
•For all other posts, the method of recruitment and promotion, and the minimum qualification laid down in the revised draft Cadre and Recruitment Rules – 2013- 14 can be followed.  
    
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 146  6.4.9 Department of Social Justice and Poverty Alleviation 
Major Changes Proposed in the Department : Social Justice  and Poverty Alleviation ( See Exhibit 
6M) 
•The existing welfare department has been renamed as the Department of Social Justice and 
Poverty alleviation as this department is concerned mainly with spending of mandatory allocation 
for SC/STs rather than welfare in general. The department also has some programmes for OBCs, 
Physically handicapped and Women. The 12thSchedule of the Constitution lists poverty alleviati on 
as one of the main functions of the urban local bodies. The mandate of the department may be 
extended to cover the poverty alleviation programmes also in the future.  
Major Changes Proposed in Cadre and Recruitment Rules : Social Justice & Poverty Allevia tion  
•Lateral entry may be allowed for the post of the head of the department. A development expert 
with considerable experience in formulating, executing and evaluating programmes for the disadvantaged section may be considered for the post.  
•For other posts, the method of recruitment, promotion and minimum qualification prescribed in the revised draft Cadre and Recruitment Policy can be followed.
     
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 147  
 
Exhibit 6A: BBM P Existing Organizational Chart  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
     
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 148   
 
Exhibit 6B: BBMP Zonal Organization Chart  
 
 
New Positions  
Existing 
Positions  
Positions 
Removed  
     
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 149   
Exhibit 6C  BBMP Existing and Proposed Organizational Structure . 
 
 
 

     
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 150   
 
Exhibit 6D - Administration Department.  
 
  

     
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 151   
Exhibit 6 E- Finance Department.  
 
 
 
 
 

     
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 152  Exhibit 6 F - Revenue Department  
 
 
  

     
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 153   
Exhibit 6G- Existing Engineering Department  
 
 
 
  Special 
Commissioner 
Projects  Eng-in 
Chief Chief Engineer 
(Projects)  Superitendent  
Engineer (Projects)  Executive Engineer 
(Electrical) Assistant Executive 
Engineer  Assistant 
Engineer/Joint 
Engineer  
Executive Engineer  Assistant Executive 
Engineer  Assistant 
Engineer/Joint 
Engineer  Work Inspector  
Chief Engineer (Road 
Infrastructure) Superitendent  
Engineer  Executive Engineer  Assistant Executive 
Engineer  
Chief Engineer (Storm 
Water Drain)  Executive Engineer  Assistant Executive 
Engineer  
Chief Engineer (Lakes)  Executive Engineer  Assistant Executive 
Engineer  
Chief Engineer (TVQC)  Executive Engineer 
(TVQC)  Assistant Executive 
Engineer  Head Office  
Zone  
Ward Offices  
     
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 154   
Exhibit 6H - Proposed  Works Department Structure.  
 
 
 
  Head Works  
Superitendent  Engineer 
(Projects including Electrical, 
Building Plans)  
Superitendent Engineer Roads  
Executive Engineer (Storm 
Water Drain)  
Superintendent 
Engineer  
Executive Engineer 
(Electrical ) 
Executive Engineer 
(Projects) 
Assistant Executive 
Engineer  
Assistant 
Engineer/Junior 
Engineer  
Work Inspector  
Executive Engineer 
(Storm Water Drain)  Head Office  Zone  Ward  
     
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 155   
Exhibit 6I- Health Department  
 
 
 
 

     
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 156  Exhibit 6J-Solid Waste Management.  
 
 
 

     
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 157  6K- Department of Ecology and Environment  
 
 
 

     
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 158  Exhibit 6L-Department of Land management  
 
 
 
   
 Head office  
     
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 159   
Exhibit 6 M - Department of Social Justice and Poverty Alleviation  
 
 
 
  
Zone  Head office  
     
 
 
 
 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
Page : 160  
6 N- Proposed Organization Chart  
 

                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
Page : 161  
7FINANCIAL  MANAGEMENT  
7.1 FINANCIAL  SUSTAINABILITY 
7.1.1 Current Status  
 
Financial sustainability is at the heart of a city’s success in delivering high quality of life to its citizens in 
the medium to long term.  The Committee has therefore identified Public Financial Management as a key reform area in the BBMP restructuring p rocess. As one of India’s top centres of economic growth, 
Bengaluru ’s ability to attract capital and talent will determine not just its own socio -economic destiny, 
but heavily influence that of Karnataka and India as well.  In order to attract capital and talent, Bengaluru  
will need to deliver high quality physical infrastructure and services, which needless to say is an end in itself as well.  Given the significant backlog at present and the rapid demographic and aspirational growth that Bengaluru  is witne ssing, high quality infrastructure and services will critically depend on the city’s 
ability to raise public finances on a large scale and manage them well to meet outcomes.       As metro regions across the globe compete for global capital and talent, Ben galuru  is fast losing its sheen.  
Bengaluru ’s prospects though 2025 in the Economist Intelligence Unit ( EIU) Hotspots 2025 report bears 
testament to this challenge.  
 
 
 
 
      
Fig 7a - 2025 City Competitiveness Rankings.  
Source: EIU Hot Spots 2025 Report
 
 
The Global Metro  Monitor  Report by Brookings  ranks Bengaluru at 87 out of 300 glo bal cities below Delhi 
(18th), Kolkata (32nd), Mumbai (52nd), Chennai (57th) and Hyderabad (76th) in the parameter of economic 
performance. 
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
Page : 162  7.1.2 Financial income and Spending on Bengaluru  
 
There is presently  no integrated view of the financial position and performance of Bengaluru city  to 
facilitate a comprehensive diagnosis .  The multiplicity of agencies - BBMP, half dozen parastatal agencies 
and yet anoth er half dozen State departments  and their differing institutional forms render such an 
integrated view difficult, especially in the absence of any institutional process targeted towards this end.  The poor quality of financial reporting exacerbates this difficulty.   
 Bengaluru  city is estimated to have generated about Rs 126,000 Crores from various sources in 2014 -15, 
94% of which comes from Central and State taxes.  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Fig 7 b- Sources and funds generated by Bengaluru (2014 -15) 
Source: ISEC  compilation  
 
In comparison, a nnual capital expenditure in the city during 2014 -15 is estimated at a pproximately Rs 
5,700 crores  with overall expenditure around Rs. 18,000 crores.  
 
 
    
 
 Source  RE 2014 -15 (Rs Cr ) 
Central Taxes  79,074
State Taxes  40,715
BBMP  1,271  
BDA  1,579  
BWSSB  710  
BMTC  2,511  
BMRCL  36 
Others   
TOTAL  1,25,896  
Figures for BWSSB pertain to year 2013 -14 
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
Page : 163   
 Revenue  
Expenditure  
(Rs Cr)  Capital  
Expenditure  
(Rs Cr)  Total  
2014 -15 (RE)  
(Rs Cr) 
State Government  6,186  1,871  8,057  
BBMP  1,610  1,317  2,927  
BDA  714 980  1,694  
BWSSB  1,156  - 1,156  
BMTC  2,349  252  2,601  
BMRCL  79 1,305  1,384  
BESCOM  804 - 804  
Total  12,898  5,725  18,623  
Fig 7 c- Revenue Expenditure of various agencies in Bengaluru (2014 -15).  
Source: ISEC compilation  
 
The Karnataka ICT Group in a 2012 -13 detailed study estimated capital expenditure requirement of 
around Rs 225,000 crores (sans interest cost) over 12 years on infrastructure and services in the city –
approximately Rs 20,000 crores per year , which is about  four  time s the current capital expenditure . What 
clearly emerges is that Bengaluru ’s civic institutions require more funds, approximately Rs 15 ,000 crores 
of capital expenditure per annum , and corresponding revenue expenditure, mainly towards Operations 
and Maintenance.  
 No one source of funding will be adequate to plug this funding gap.  A combination of sources will be needed including  
•Larger share of own revenues of civic institutions, including better collection efficiencies  
•Identifying and exploiting new revenue opportunities  
•Systematic use of land- based financing, PPPs and increasing return on own property  
•Assignment of buoyant revenue streams by the S tate government to the city, in addition to the 
current State Finance Commission grants  
• Raising add itional resources from the market through municipal bonds or pooled finance  
•Availing fully funds available under the 14
th Finance Commission grants, both basic and 
performance an d under the AMRUT and Smart Cities mission. 
 
All of the above involve significant efforts and will need to emerge from a collaborative effort between the 
State Government , GBA  and Civic institutions, with the GBA  demonstrating leadership  in building 
capacities and measuring performance and C ivic institutions taking expeditious action.  Needless to say, 
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
Page : 164  greater funds need to be necessarily accompanied by significantly better financial management  and the 
human resources to manage the infrastructure provisioning . 
 
The BBMP’s financial sustainability in particular is a matter of grave  concern. The  following numbers 
explain why : 
 
Particulars  Amount (Rs Cr)  
Pending Bills as of March 2015  2,331  
Outstanding loans as of March 2015  2,234  
Total  4,565  
  
Annual Own Revenue Receipts 2014 -15 1,271  
Fig 7 d: Debt Analysis and Annual Receipts  of BBMP.  
Source: BBMP, ISEC, Janaagraha.  Amounts for Revenue Receipts 2014 -15 are Revised Estimates from BBMP’ s 
Budget 2015 -16 
 
The current financial situation of the BBMP has been the result of a long -drawn neglect of its financial 
sustainability and violation of basic principles of public financial management.  The consistently poor quality of budgeting in successive years, with overstatement in excess of 100% in most years, is reflective 
of both.   
 
 
Fig 7 e- Trends in BBMP receipts (2010 -11 to 2014 -15 (RE) ) 
  8,447   9,401   9,941  
 8,521  
 6,026  
 3,320   4,003   3,830  
 3,093   2,894  
 - 2,000 4,000 6,000 8,000 10,000 12,000
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15Receipts (Rs. cr)  
Budget Actuals/RE
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
Page : 165   
Fig 7 f- Trends in BBMP expenditure (2010 -11 to 2014- 15 (RE) ) 
 
State Governments in the past have also not b een innovative in focussing on land -based financing and 
PPPs .  It is in the interest of the S tate government to hand hold civic institutions of the city towards 
financial sustainability, which has not happened in a sustained, transformative manner.  
 
In asp ects of good financial governance which are also crucial for financial sustainability, such as quality 
and timeliness of budgeting, medium -term fiscal planning, transparency and citizen participation and 
timely completion of audit of annual accounts, civic  institutions of Bengaluru  score poorly, with BBMP 
leading the pack. Financial details about BBMP as gleaned from their reports are set out in the Exhibits.  
7.1.3 Issues and Challenges  
 
Taking into account the current status of financial sustainability, and adeq uacy of expenditure required to 
meet target service levels in the medium to the long -term, the Committee believes the following major 
challenges need to be dealt with : 
•Significant debt burden and emaciated operating cash flows at the BBMP  
•Lack of an institutional mechanism to periodically review the financial sustainability of Bengaluru, and make recommendations for its improvement  
•Poor use of land -based financing instruments  
•Weak institutional capacities- financial, human and technological- in civic in stitutions of 
Bengaluru, with specific reference to financial management   8,861   9,401   9,941  
 8,521  
 6,026  
 3,626   3,839   4,358  
 3,343   2,927  
 - 2,000 4,000 6,000 8,000 10,000 12,000
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15Expenditure (Rs. cr)  
Budget Actuals/RE
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
Page : 166  •Low degrees of fiscal decentralisation, rendering civic institutions heavily dependent on the 
state government, and partially incapable financial self- sufficiency and independent deci sion -
making   
•Absence of a robust Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management mechanism for the city of Bengaluru  
•Lack of transparency and accountability in financial position and performance, expenditure and service levels . 
7.1.4 Recommendations : Financial Sustainability  
 
•An urgent debt restructuring exercise needs to be undertaken at the BBMP, dovetailed into a medium term fiscal recovery plan  
•Establish an independent Greater Bengaluru Finance Commission every five years, entrusted 
with the following major functions  
oMake recommendations on the distribution of financial resources between agencies under the GBA jurisdiction, and between agencies and zones/wards . Focus on Municipal 
Corporations, Z ones and Wards  and arrive at distribution norms based on their 
infrastructure situation and financial need. To also consider devolving a portion of the 
property tax income to the Wards   
oRecommend measures to augment financial resources of agencies in the GBA 
jurisdiction through both tax and non -tax revenues , including the GBA itself, its 
constituent municipalities and other parastatal agencies   
oReview the financial position and financial and operational performance of the GBA and 
its constituents and ma ke recommendations on measures to improve financial 
sustainability, including appropriate Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management 
mechanisms  
oReview standards for Public Expenditure Management processes and systems, comprising 1) financial reporting st andards, 2) budgeting standards 3) performance 
measurement and reporting standards and 4) standards for related information 
systems.  
 
  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
Page : 167  Strengthen I nstitutional capacities of the city in the following manner : 
•Create a full- time and permanent Finance function in the GBA to be headed by a full -time 
Chief Financial Officer   
•The CFO shall be a Chartered Accountant or Masters in Business or Finance or equivalent 
post graduate degree in finance with not less than fifteen years’ experience in the finance 
function, including as head of finance in a comparably large public or private organisation. 
The CFO shall be responsible for financial sustainability and overall financial management in the GBA  
•Mandate the position o f CFO as the head of the finance function in all civic institutions 
within the GBA with commensurate technical and managerial skills and professional work experience in finance or business or commerce or accounting, and to be drawn from the private or publ ic sectors  
•Establish a comprehensive and integrated financial management information system for GBA and its constituent entities, which can serve as a City Resource Planning platform, on 
the lines of an ERP system for the city, immediately for the BBMP and  in a phased manner 
for the remaining entities  
•Specifically on land -based financing and PPPs, State Government to work closely with the 
GBA on the following big -ticket agendas  
oLiaise with the Ministry of Defence, Government of India to better exploit Defen ce 
Land in Bengaluru  by freeing up excess land of 1,272 acres identified in the P ublic 
Accounts Committee Report of December 2013 on Defence Estates Management and 
exploring strategic land exchange mechanisms  for non -strategic Defence Land in 
Central Busin ess District of Bengaluru  
oCoordinate with the Indian Railways to identify land parcels in the city for joint development and/or planning, and to free up land in excess of requirement  of 
Railways  
oUndertake immediate steps in fiscal decentralisation, es pecially to the BBMP 
(further elaborated later  in this chapter ) 
oInstitute robust mechanisms for Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management and Transparency and Accountability in finances and operations (further elaborated 
later  in this chapter ).   
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
Page : 168  7.2 FISCA L DECENTRALISATION   
7.2.1 Current Status  
 
The degree of both general and fiscal decentralisation by the State government to the BBMP is low.  The 
state government has disproportionate discretionary powers over the BBMP, leaving the BBMP with little flexibility over its finances.  The Annual Survey of India’s City -Systems 2014, an annual benchmarking of 
cities carried out by Janaagraha, ranked Bengaluru  20
th out of 21 major Indian cities including 18 state 
capitals on the category of Urban Capacities and Resources, primarily on account of low degrees of 
decentralisation.    
 A review of certain critical provisions of the KMC Act reveal s the following in respect of the powers of the 
BBMP:  
Decentralisation  Whether BBMP 
has powers?  Remark s 
General   
Delimitation  No Done by State Govt . u/s 21 of KMC Act 1976  
Reservations  No Done by State Govt . u/s 21  
Appointment of staff  No Done by State Govt . u/s 91A  
Transfer of staff No Done by State Govt .u/s 91A
Term of Council  No Done by State Govt . u/s 99  
  
Fiscal   
Property tax  Partly Yes  BBMP has restricted powers to set rates  
Advertisement tax  No Rates subject to Min -Max set by State  
Loans  No Prior approval of State Govt .u/s 154  
Budgets  No State Govt’s approval required u/s 170
Building bye -laws  No State Govt’s approval required u/s 295
General Expenditure  No Upto  Rs 50 lacs -Commissioner : Upto  Rs 3  Cr-
Standing Committee and  Upto  Rs 5 Cr -Council  
Beyond that State Govt .approval required  
  Fig 7g - Analysis of Fiscal and General decentralisation in BBMP.  
Source: Janaagraha  
 
  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
Page : 169  The constrained fiscal environment coupled with gross inefficiencies in assessments and collections has 
led to BBMP’s own revenue per capita lagging that of its peer cities including Ahmedabad, Chennai, Hyderabad, Mumbai and Pune. The current status of the BBMP is sub -normal and characterised by 
limited powers, weak institutional capacities and huge inefficiencies in operations.  A full turnaround would therefore require the BBMP to have greater fiscal powers, stronger institutional processes and 
demonstrable accountability for performance and delivery.  
 Besides the issues and challenges with respect to the BBMP, there is also an acute asymmetry between financial capacities and service obligations of civic institutions.  The lack of an integrated treasury function for the city currently results in cash losses  for the State Government and for the city, both in 
terms of debt m anagement and cash management.    
7.2.2 Issues and challenges  
 
Principal issues and challenges in terms of powers of t he BBMP are : 
•Limited revenue streams over which it has control, therefore a narrow revenue base to work with  
•No full rights over determination of tax rates and underlying capital values, even for eligible revenue 
streams, leading to lack of buoyancy in revenue streams  
•Prior approval of State Government needed for availing loans, annual budgets  
•Low thresholds of financial expenditure, above which State Government approval required, thus 
delaying public spending  
•There is no coordinated treasury function for t he city that ensures economies and capacities in 
management of resources.     
7.2.3 Recommendations : Fiscal Decentralisation  
•Fully devolve powers to set tax rates and the underlying base values to the GBA, in respect of  
oProperty tax, Profession tax , Entertainment tax  
While the GBA shall set property tax rates and base values, the sharing of property tax revenues between the GBA, the municipalities and wards shall be recommended by the Greater Bengaluru Finance Commission  
•State Government to work closely with the GBA and the Greater Bengaluru Finance  
Commission on the following big -ticket agendas of fiscal decentralisation  
oAssign a certain percentage of Stamp Duties and Registration charges from Bengaluru back to Bengaluru  
oConsider  in the GST roadmap for Karnataka, assignment of a certain percentage of 
GST to GBA     
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
Page : 170  •Establish a Land and Property Management division in the GBA, reporting to the CFO,  that is 
entrusted with  
oCreating a GIS -based database of all land and proper ty owned by the central government, 
the state government and civic agency instituti ons in the GBA  
oEnsuring optimum utilisation of land and property, both in terms of appropriateness of 
usage and revenues earned  
oPeriodic review and revision of lease agreements to ensure marking to market of lease 
rentals from time to time  
oCarrying out Sell vs Hold analysis on existing land and property and Buy vs Lease analysis on potential purchases, ensuring decision -making in respect of land and property is based on 
cont emporary data and rigorous analysis  
oMonitoring trends in demand and supply and prices of land and real estate and making recommendations on base values on which property taxes and stamp duties are levied (presently guideline values)  
oEvaluate potential for  joint developments/PPPs in respect of land and property owned by 
the GBA and its constituents  
oAdvise the GBA on monetisation and utilisation of land in core city areas and approach to executing the same . 
•Establish a Treasury division in the GBA that is entrusted with integrated treasury management, including liquidity and debt management at a GBA level and for constituent civic institutions in 
coor dination with respective CFOs  
•Facilitate levy of service charges on government properties in accordance with  the  Supreme Court  
judgement in the Rajkot Municipal Corporation case of 2003 and related circular from Ministry of 
Urban Development, Government of India  in December 2009 .  
7.3 FISCAL  RESPONSIBILITY  AND  BUDGET  MANAGEMENT  
7.3.1 Current status  
 The Union and State governments in India have Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) legislations in place primarily to ensure stability and transparency in fiscal operations of governments.  
While fiscal stability may not apply to a large degree to local governments, transpa rency in fiscal 
operations and rule -based approaches to budget management are both relevant and contemporary for 
Bengaluru ’s civic institutions. The current status of six aspects of FRBM relevant  to Bengaluru : 
 
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
Page : 171  FRBM Aspect  Current Status  
Medium Term Fiscal Plans  •No integrated five year medium -term fiscal plan for the city or for the 
BBMP  
•Annual Budgets prepared stand -alone and not linked to a longer -term 
plan  
Timeliness of Budgets  •Delays in BBMP’s budgets in each of the years from 2011 to 2016, over 
100 days in four consecutive years.    
Refer Exhibit 7B 
Quality of Budget Estimates •BBMP’s budgets consistently overestimated, in most years by over 
100% , as is evident from 7.1.1 above .  
•BDA’s budget variance in the range of  
50-80% during 2010 -2011 to 2013 -14  
•BWSSB  had variances of 25 -40% during 2010 -11 and 2013 -14. 
Refer Exhibits 7C and 7 D 
Citizen Participation in Budgeting  •No systematic and comprehensive framework for citizen participation 
in budgeting of any civic institution  
Audited Financial Statements  •Last audited financial statements of the BBMP relates to 2012 -13 
•Audit Reports of other entities heavily qualified, seemingly without 
implications for the management.  
•Poor s tate of disclosures of audited financial statements  
Internal Controls and 
Operational Risk Management  •Poor design and operating effectiveness of internal controls.  E.g. BBMP 
has  600 -800 bank accounts, most of which have not been reconciled for  
several y ears
•No effective, independent internal audit function  
Collection efficiencies  •Property tax collections a serious area of concern. Other than annual 
budget estimates, no other estimate available of assessable property tax.   
BBMP uses outdated guidance values  (2007 currently) .  
Against budgeted estimates, actual collections have been lower by 40 -
80% over the last five years.  Both incomplete assessments, poor 
collection efficiencies therefore are challenges at the BBMP .  Re fer 
Exhibit 7 E 
Fig 7h-Status of FRBM in Bengalur u 
  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
Page : 172  7.3.2 Issues and Challenges  
 
Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management is not a macroeconomic or high level theoretical framework for a city.  It has a direct implication on institutional capacities, downstream accountability for service delivery and therefore quality of life experienced by citizens.  The issues and challenges on this 
front include : 
•Absence of medium range planning from a financial management perspective  
•Lackadaisical approach to finan cial reporting across the board, across entities and across critical 
aspects of it  
•No formal platforms or structured framework for citizen participation in the annual budgeting process  
•Poor assessment and collection efficiencies in respect of major tax an d non-tax revenue streams .  No 
timely updation of guidance values used by the BBMP, though the State Government has been 
issuing fresh numbers at frequent intervals.   
7.3.3 Recommendations : FRBM  
 
•Cover all civic institutions of Bengaluru under the ambit of the Karnataka Municipal Accou nting and 
Budgeting Rules 2006 that are currently applicable to all municipalities of Karnataka, except the BBMP.  The KMABR 2006 include provisions on 
oTimeliness of Budget estimates  
oSystematic and time -bound citizen participation in budgeting  
oEmpanelment of Chartered Accountants as independent auditors of financial statements (also known as annual accounts)  
oSpecified timelines for filing of auditor’s report and audited financial statements  
oTimely disclosure of a comprehensive Annua l Performance Report that contains a City 
Management Report, audited financial statements, cost and performance indicators and a budget variance statement  
oThe City Management Report shall contain a commentary on the financial performance and position, reas ons for deviations from plan or any adverse performance, current progress and 
future plans and management comments on adverse comments in the auditor’s report.  
•Mandate a five year Medium Term Fiscal Plan (MTFP) for the GBA and for all its constituent civi c 
institutions, with annual budgets of each entity to be necessarily drawn based on the MTFP, with estimates for the remaining period (i.e. Budget for year 1 plus projections for years 2 to 5 on how the MTFP would be met, Budget for year 2 plus projections  for remai ning 3 years etc. ) 
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
Page : 173  oGBA should link assignment of revenues with their performance against the MTFP and 
provide incentives linked to the same, including timely presentation of annual budgets   
oGBA shall enforce the public disclosure law across its entities and link release of assigned revenues, performance linked incentives to timely disclosures under the PDL provisions . 
•GBA’s CFO shall be responsible for empanelment and selection of Chartered Accountants as auditors 
of annual accounts of its consti tuent civic institutions and also independent internal auditors who 
shall produce quarterly internal audit reports and present them to the GBA within 2 months from 
the close of a quarter  
•The billing and collection function in respect of property tax could  be outsourced to external 
vendors after a rigorous evaluation process, to provide adequate bandwidth to civic institutions to 
focus on assessments, which includes ascertaining 100% of the tax base (i.e. full universe of 
assesses) and putting in place effective systems and processes to administer the same.  Collection efficiencies and completeness of assessments shall be made necessary pre conditions for assigned revenues and performance linked incentives.      
•The BBMP sh all use updated guidance values for property tax assessments and other revenue 
streams that are based on guidance values.  
•The Bank Payments process in the BBMP needs to be strengthened on priority basis, including rationalisation of number of bank accounts , timely bank reconciliation, centralising payments and 
making them online except for rare exceptions, if any. 
7.4 TRANSPARENCY  AND  ACCOUNTABILITY  
7.4.1 Current Status  
Of all of the sections of Public Financial Management, transparency and accountability touches a c itizen’s 
life like no other in two ways.  Firstly, it gives an account of the financial and operational performance of civic institutions, but more importantly it  co-opts citizens into the governance process of a city, exposing 
the citizen to not just the failures of a civic institution, but to its successes and the odds against which they were achieved.  A city is a democratic entity and building trust and participation of city dwellers needs to be an essential objective o f the city government. Bengaluru arguably has the most vibrant, active 
and mature civil society ecosys tems in the country. Bengaluru’s undisputed status as the technology 
capital of India and the region, provides a great opportunity to civic institutions to build trust and 
catalyse greater  civic participation and civic ownership.  
 
ASICS 2014 ranks Bengaluru  3
rd among 21 cities under Transparency, Accountability and Participation, 
behind Bhopal and Thiruvananthapuram, indicating its relatively superior performance here, compared 
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
Page : 174  to other as pects of financial management.  However, the Committee believes Bengaluru  also has greater 
needs and opportunities on this front compared to other cities.  Our evaluation of the current status of 
transparency and accountancy in Bengaluru is reflective of t hat opinion.  
 Salient features of transparency and accountancy in Bengaluru’s civic institutions:  
•Transparency has generally been poor, especially with respect to tendering and contracting, status of and actual expenditure on works and projects, and  audited financial statements  
•Efforts to improve transparency have been patchy and not sustained and transformative  
•On the positive side, civic institutions including the BBMP have actively adopted social media to 
engage directly with citizens  
•They have also implemented  grievance redressal mechanisms but to varying degrees of success with 
some such as BESCOM largely successful while other such as the BBMP being laggards  
•Through initiatives such as Bengaluru  One and Sakala, there have been transformative efforts aimed 
at providing guaranteed t ime-bound services to citizens  
•Accountability remains a serious area of concern, in respect of finances, expenditure and service 
levels  
•Technology has generally been under -utilised and not fully exploited as a key enabler of transparency 
and accountability .  
7.4.2 Issues and Challenges  
 
The overarching challenges at the core of transparency and accountability are as follows : 
•Lack of enabling laws and policies that place transparency and accountability in the DNA of civic institutions, and where they exist, absence of penal provisions and expedient redressal mechanisms  
•Inadequate skills and competencies required to design and implement sound transparency and accountability strategies  
•A weak information backbone especially at the BBMP, which debilitates its ability to generate, 
organise and report financial and operational information in a sustained manner .  
7.4.3 Recommendations : Transparency and Accountability  
 
•Mandate production of well -defined Performance MIS reports in each department of the BBMP at 
pre-defined frequencies (daily/weekly/monthly/quarterly/half -yearly/annual) and link them 
irrevocably to day to day operations, enabled by technology and policy provisions.  E.g. completion 
of bank reconciliation for a month by the fifth working day of the next  month in the accounting 
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
Page : 175  system will be a precondition for being able to process bank payments on the system from the sixth 
working day onwards.   
•A separate specialist Task Force is recommended to be constituted  immediately for fast track 
implementation of the same in the BBMP and to recommend detailed workflows to ensure the MIS 
process and system are institutionalised.  The Finance function of the GBA shall be responsible for 
phased roll out of such a mechanism across its constituent civic institutions  
•Amend Cadre and Recruitment rules of the BBMP to introduce the position of a Chief MIS Officer at 
the BBMP, who shall be a Chartered Accountant or a Masters in Business, Finance or equivalent 
subject with not less than ten years’ professional work experience in the business performance or business finance function of a large private or public organisation.  The Chief MIS Officer shall be 
responsible for the efficient operation of the  mechanism.  Every department of the BBMP needs to 
have an MIS Officer who shall be a B Com graduate with no less than six years’ work experience in 
finance and accounting.  The MIS officer shall report to the Chief MIS Officer of the BBMP with dotted line  reporting to the Head of the Department and shall be responsible for timely production 
of MIS reports for that department  
•Implement an integrated information system in the BBMP, on the lines of an ERP system  
oPhase 1 needs to be a full roll out of the Inte grated Financial Management System (IFMS) 
which has been partially implemented so far for issuance of job numbers and generation of work bills.  IFMS roll out needs to consider the following  
oComputerisation of the accounts department of the BBMP, which cur rently has extensive 
manual workflows  
oRoll out of accounting module of IFMS, migration of balances from other systems of the BBMP, primarily FBAS to the IFMS; IFMS to be the sole accounting and works management system for the BBMP  
oImplement remaining aspects of workflows and internal controls such as bank reconciliation statements, online payments for work bills etc.  
oBuild the MIS framework referred to above in IFMS  
•Phase 2 needs to be a comprehensive review of the IT systems of the BBMP with a view to ascertaining the various IT systems in use across departments of the BBMP, their functionalities, 
advantages and shortcomings  
oevaluating the current information architecture in a comprehensive manner and making recommendations on a scalable model that can serve the B BMP for the medium to long 
term  
oascertaining opportunities to use technology to improve efficiency of operations and 
accountability  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
Page : 176  odrawing up a transition roadmap to the recommended model  
oidentifying the right vendors and partners who can collabo rate with the BBMP in 
delivering  a comprehensive solution.  
•Enlist support of the Karnataka Municipal Data Society (formerly the Municipal Reforms Cell) 
constituted under the aegis of the Department of Municipal Administration, Government of 
Karnataka for implementation of two specific reforms on a fast track mode in the BBMP 
oDesign, measure and report Service Level Benchmarks for all major services and functions of 
the BBMP; implement a comprehensive IT solution for the same  
oPrepare a credible opening balance sheet for the BBMP as the stepping stone to clearing 
backlog in its annual accounts and having them audited in a time -bound manner; implement 
the empanelment process followed for other municipalities in Karnataka  
This will in turn require a serious  exercise of physical verification of fixed assets and 
inventories of the BBMP on an immediate basis.  
•The full series of accounting and audit reforms that are required in general across civic institutions as appropriate are as below .  It is recommended th at the Task Force referred to above evaluate the 
BBMP’s current processes against these and create a ti me-bound implementation roadmap  
oDouble Entry Accrual Based accounting system as the single method of maintenance of books of account (as against the current practice where both DEABS and cash based accounting records are being maintained)  
oAccounting Standards issued by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India be adopted 
for preparation of annual account s 
oAnnual Accounts comprising Balance Sheet, Income and Expenditure Statement, Cash Flow 
Statement with notes to accounts including accounting policies be prepared in accordance with the Nat ional Municipal Accounts Manual  
oProfessional firm of Chartered Accountants be empaneled as external auditors, with  checks 
and balances such as periodic rotation of firms  
oAudited Annual Accounts along with the Auditors Report, Statements from the Mayor and 
Commissioner on the performance of the municipal corporations be compiled and put out in the public domain before 30 September each year (for year ending 31 Mar of that year)  
oAn independent internal audit function be put in place.  A reputed professional firm be 
appointed to carry out the same  
oThe respective Council/Boards of municipal corporations and the Greater Ben galuru  
Authority be mandated to respond to audit observations within a defined time period, 
covering performance audits of the CAG, audits by DLFA/Chief Auditor where they continue to be in place, and internal audit referred to above  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
Page : 177  oDevolution of State Gr ants be made contingent on the above  
oPeriodic revaluation of assets, especially land and buildings, be carried out to ascertain the 
true financial position of civic entities .  
•The Karnataka Right to Information (Disclosure of Information by Authorities Providing Municipal Services) Rules 2009 be  meaningfully implemented, to ensure timely updation of detailed 
information to citizens in accordance with the said Rules.   Such disclosure needs to be integrated 
with workflows of respective depa rtments of civic in stitutions  
•Introduce a simple process of participatory budgeting by making available forms for citizen inputs 
online and at all ward offices of the BBMP.   
  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
Page : 178   
Exhi bit 7 A 
Expenditure on Bengaluru  by select State Government Departments  
 
2014 -15 Operating 
expenditure  
(Rs Cr ) Capital 
expenditure  
(Rs Cr ) 
 Total  
(Rs Cr ) 
 
Infrastructure Development  1 95 96 
Forest Ecology and Environment  58 - 58 
Health and Family Welfare  616  175 791  
Home and Transport  1,283  61 1,344  
Social Welfare  685  223 908  
Housing  416  593 1,009  
Education  1,778  41 1,819  
Public Works  366  554 920  
Energy  983  129 1,112  
Grand Total  6,186 1,871  8,057  
 
Source: ISEC  compilation  
 
  
 
  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
Page : 179  Exhibit  7B 
 
Budget Timelines as per KMC Act  
 
 
Sour ce: Janaagra ha 
 
BBMP ’s Budget Timelines  
 
Budget 
Year  Due Date  Actual Date  Delay 
(Days)  
2015 -16 07-Feb 17-Mar -15 38 
2014 -15 18-Feb-14 11 
2013 -14 27-Jul-13 170
2012 -13 29-Jun-12 143  
2011 -12 18-Aug -11 192  
2010 -11 8-Aug -10 182  
 
Note: Dates given above relate to presentation of budgets in the council  
Source: Janaagraha  
  Section of KMC Act  Step  Provision in brief  Deadline  
166  1 Commissioner to submit detailed budget estimates to 
Standing Committee.  15-Jan 
167  2 
 
3 Budget estimates to be prepared by Standing Committee 
on Taxation and Finance.   
Commissioner to print and forward Budget estimates 
approved by Standing Committee to each of the 
Councillors.  01-Feb 
168  4 Budget to be laid before the corporation  
(i.e. the council).  07-Feb 
170  5 Corporation to pass budget estimates 3 weeks before 
beginning of the year to which it relates and forward to 
State Government for approval.  09-Mar
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
Page : 180  Exhibit 7 C 
 
Budgets vs Actuals Trend of the BDA  
 
 
 
                         Source: ISEC Compilation , Janaagraha  
   3,650   5,074   4,927  
 1,946   2,000  
 446   717   749   880   1,579  
 - 1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,000 6,000
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15Receipts  
Budget Actual/RE
Amounts  in Rs Cr 
 3,644   5,068   4,925  
 1,944   1,998  
 697   716   1,050   1,105   1,694  
 - 1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,000 6,000
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15Expenditure  
Budget Actual/RE                                                    
Amounts in RsCr
 
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
Page : 181  Exhibit 7 D 
 
Budgets vs Actuals Trend of the BWSSB  
 
 
 
 
Source: Janaagraha   2,831   3,210   3,026   3,213   4,012  
 1,877   2,341  
 1,947   1,947   3,145  
 - 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500 4,000 4,500
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15Receipts  
Budget Actual/RE
 2,918   3,320   3,215   3,640   4,290  
 2,223   2,495   2,198   2,194   3,617  
 - 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500 4,000 4,500 5,000
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15Expenditure  
Budget Actual/RE
Amounts in Rs Cr  Amounts in Rs Cr  
 
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
Page : 182  Exhibit 7 E 
 
Trend in BBMP’s Property tax collections  
 
 
Source: BBMP reports; Janaagraha.  
BBMP internal figures for the year vary from these numbers  
  1,100   1,650   1,500   2,000   3,200  
 2,135  
 657   823   793   1,085  
 727   783  
 - 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500
2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15Property Tax  
Budget ActualAmounts in Rs Cr  Amounts in Rs Cr  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
Page : 183  Exhibit 7 F 
 
BBMP’s Non tax collections  
 
Source: ISEC  
Values in the brackets are Percentage to the total. All values are budget estimates  
Town planning, Revenue, Engineering public works Zonal departments have earned the highest non tax revenue. Health General th at was expected to generate a 
large portion of the NTR (as per the BE) yielded very small NTR. It is generally observed t hat the NTR is very low and does not cover even the operating expenses 
and has a considerable scope for reform and additional revenue generation  
 BBMP Non Tax R evenue ( Rs Cr)  
 2008 -09 2014 -15 
BBMP Top Non 
Tax Receipts  Revenue  Capital  Total (BE)  Actual  Revenue  Capital  Total (BE)  RE 
Revenue  91(19%) 50 (10%) 141 (29%) 47 (20%) 38 (10%) 10 (3%) 48 (13%) 120 (25%) 
Town Planning  41(9%) - 41 (8%) 112 (48%)  102(27 %) - 101.5 (27%) 191 (40%) 
Health General  131 (26%) 100 (20%) 231 (47%) 10 (4%) 7 (2%) - 7 (2%) 3(1%) 
Engineering Public  
Works Z onal  18(4%) - 18 (4%) 32(14%) 163 (43%) - 163 (43%) 124 (26%) 
Other N on T ax 
Revenue59(12%) - 59 (12%) 32 (14%) 44 (12%) 10 (3%) 54 (15%) 37(8%) 
Total  342 (70%) 150 (30%) 492 (100%)  233 (100%)  354 (95%) 20 (5%) 374 (100%)  475 (100%)  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
Page : 184  Exhibit 7 G 
 
Department wise Expenditure in BBMP  
  
Source: ISEC  compilation  
50-60 percent of the Payments are concentrated in engineering – public works, projects and road related infrastructure and there is by and large an even 
distribution among the other heads. Poor expenditure planning indicated by the deviation between the budgeted and actual payments, and it is even more serious 
in 2014 -15 BBMP Payments (Rs. Cr)  
Departments  2008 -09 
(BE) 2008 -09 
(Actual)  2014 -15 
(BE)2014 -15 
(RE)  Growth on 
2008 -09 
Council  16 (1%)  6 (0%)  354 (6%)  115 (4%)  1817 % 
GAD – Management  192  (7%)  138  (6%)  349 (6%)  223 (8%)  62%  
Finance & Accounts  53 (2%)  102  (4%)  98 (2%)  34 (1%)  (67)%  
Engineering - Public Works 
(Zonal)  636(22%)  825 (35%)  2095 (35%)  970 (33%)  18%  
Engineering – Projects  487 (17%)  423(18%)  602 (10%)  252  (9%)  (40)%  
Engineering - Road Related 
Infrastructure  223 (8%)  135  (6%)  230  (4%)  243  (8%)  80% 
Engineering – Electrical  164  (6%)  139  (6%)  14(0 %) 88 (3%)  (37)%  
Public Health Engineering - Zonal - 112  (5%)  346  (6%)  291 (10%)  160%  
Welfare  180 (6%) 72 (3%)  396 (7%)  138  (5%)  92% 
Others  968 (33%)  405 (17%)  1,54 2(26%) 573 (20%)  41%  
Total Payments  2,919 (100%)  2,357 (100%)  6,026 (100%)  2,927  (100%)  24%  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT  
Page : 185  Exhibit 7 H 
Departmen t wise Expenditure in BBMP  
Distr ibution of BBMP Expenditure by Ca pex and O pex (Rs .Cr) 
Year  Capex (BE)  Capex (Actual)  Opex  (BE)  Opex (Actual)  
2008 -09 1,672  1,465  1,247  968  
2009 -10 2,430  1,953  1,808  1,630  
2010 -11 6,297 1,793  2,474  1,837  
2011 -12 6,886  2,151  2,515  1,783  
2012 -13 6,870  2,413  2,610  1,871  
2013 -14 5,687  1,717  2,833  1,636  
2014 -15 3,995  2,052  2,031  1,657  
Source: ISEC  compilation  
 
In the case of BBMP while the share of C apex has declined from 60.22 percent to 55.33 percent that of Opex has increased from 40 percent to 45 percent. Actual 
capital and operating expenses have been smal ler than the budgeted estimates . Capex especially has been budge ted to be much larger than the Opex.  
 
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
   
Page : 186STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
8 STRATEGIC  & SPATIAL  PLANNING  FRAMEWORK  
8.1 THE  KARNATAKA  TOWN  AND  COUNTRY  PLANNING ACT,  1961     
 
With the intention of having a uniform law for the regulation of planned growth, of land use and 
development and for the making and execution of town planning schemes in the State, the KTCPA 1961 
was enacted. The contents include frameworks and procedures mandated for the preparation of Existing 
Land Use Plans, City Master Plans, Town Planning Schemes and the Acquisition of Land. This Act has not 
undergone ‘comprehensive’ revision in over  50 years and relies on planning techniques which are a 
legacy of old British Acts in India when the complexities of large metropolitan cities were not yet 
imagined.  It lacks a mandate for inter departmental coordination, it does not have provisions for scales of 
plans, it continues to promote mono functional land uses , no m andate to integrate i nfrastructure plans 
with land use plans, and has largely served as a weak instrument in managing urban growth . Getting 
urban planning right is fundamental to  economic prosperity. The Model Urban & Regional Planning and 
Development Law (Revised) formulated post the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act amongst other 
considerations sets a mandate for the KTCPA’s revision and introducing  planning at scales.  Using this 
mandate and understanding current frameworks and urbanization dynamics, the proposed scales of 
plans with a focus on Bengaluru  are:  
 
 
        
 
    
 
     
 
 
Fig 8a : Proposed Scales of Plans for Karnataka with a focus on Bengaluru ; EMBARQ -WRI India  
Karnataka 
State
District/ 
Bengaluru 
Metropolitan 
Region
Bengaluru 
Local Planning 
Area
Municipal 
Zonal and 
Ward Area
State Five Year Plans
Urban Vision 2020
Annual Plans
South Karnataka 
Region Plan
BMR Revised 
Structure Plan 2031
Interim Master Plans 
for local planning 
areas within Region
Revised Master Plan 
for BMA
JNNURM CDP
JNNURM DPR
Development 
projects for zones
Actual Situation 
 Model Law
State Perspective 
Plan
Perspective Plan for 
Districts;
Development Plan for Districts
Perspective Plan for 
Metropolitan Area;
Development Plan for Metropolitan 
Area
Perspective Plan for 
Local Planning Area
Development Plan 
for Local Planning 
Area
Development 
Scheme
Land Pooling 
Scheme
KTCP Act, 1961 
Outline Development 
Plan/ CDPs for LPAs 
within Region
Master Plan / Outline 
Development Plan
Town Planning 
Scheme
State Perspective Plan and 
Urban Vision
Inter -Regional Development 
Strategy 
District / Bengaluru 
Metropolitan Region 
Perspective Strategy and 
Development Plan
Bengaluru Strategic Spatial 
Plan and Strategic Projects 
+
Land Use and DCR oriented 
Development Plan
City Development Plan and 
Strategic Projects for other 
Medium and Small Sized 
Urban Centres
Municipal Zonal Plans 
Ward Plans 
Schemes and Projects
Proposed Karnataka Urban 
and Regional Planning and 
Development Act
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
   
Page : 187STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
 
  
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
Scales of plans which are larger than that of Bengaluru  and its City -Region are briefly 
discussed:  
8.1.1 State Perspective plan and Vision  
This plan  needs to s et the Vision and priorities for the State and its various districts, ensure integration of 
spatial planning with economic development plans (State five year plans) and the coordination of all 
other sectoral policies at the State Level.  
 
8.1.2 Inter -Regional  Development Strategy  
This plan addresses the several regions of Karnataka whether it is environment related such as the 
Western Ghats or the Coastal Belt, or socio - economic such as backward districts, or industrial corridors 
or urban corridors all of whi ch require inter district cooperation and coordination.  
 
8.1.3 District Perspective Strategy and Development Plan  
This plan is prepared by the District Planning Committee (DPC) in consultation with Urban  Development 
Authorities (UDAs),  MPC s, ULBs and Panchayats . The district plan which is a constitutional mandate 
addresses the complex function of urban and rur al integration.  
To avoid duplication in preparation of a Perspective Plan and a Development Plan for the District, the Perspective Plan may be more of a strategic document setting out policies and vision for a 20 year period 
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
   
Page : 188STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
whereas the Development Plan with a 5 year term contains goals, objectives and priorities taking into 
account various sectoral requirements of panchayats and municipal bodies and their spatial implications.  
The plan will address issues arising between fast urbanising and intervening rural areas such as sharing of water and other natural resources, location of industries  and environmental conservation . Provisions 
for integrated infrastruc ture development proposals, natural resource conservation, and social and 
economic development proposals will also be included.  
8.2 PLANNING  FOR  BENGALURU’S  CITY  - REGION    
8.2.1 The Dynamic Nature of Bengaluru ’s City – Region  
 The core city of Bengaluru  enjoys the position of the primate in the region. Several other smaller yet 
dynamic settlements such as Anekal, Devanahalli, Nelamangala and Ramanagaram etc. are present whose growth potentials are not only directly connected to decisions Bengaluru makes, but also ne ed to plan 
and manage their own self- sustaining futures. Urban settlements in the region of Bengaluru  house key 
regional facilities that Bengaluru  is critically dependant on, but can no longer hold onto, such as an 
international airport (BIAL International  Airport at Devanahalli), industrial clusters housing new 
economies such as IT and ITES (Electronics City towards Anekal Taluk) or just industrial shifts and expansion ( e.g. The ITC Factory that shifted to the New Airport Road while the old premises now ho uses 
ITC Infotech).  
 
 
  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
   
Page : 189STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
The peripheries of Bengaluru  are its most dynamic areas with over a 100% growth rate of population 
seen beyond both the municipal and development authority boundary . Such urbanisation is not restricted 
to administrative jurisdictions alone, as rapid population growth rates are seen along major transport 
corridors, around key regional facilities and as outward radial city expansion.    
 ‘In global city regions, several city functions have spun outwards around older central cores, creating 
complex networks of interdependence between city, suburb and region. This development becomes increasingly complex both from a political and governance point of view. World city regions  all have 
forged global economic linkages in advanced producer services and finance and are competing internationally as entire regions, rather than just as core cities ’. (Paul Kantor et all, 2012)  
 
The 2013 World Bank Report on ‘ Urbanization beyond Munic ipal Boundaries ’ in a detailed study of the 7 
largest metropolitan cities in India (including Bengaluru) found that the pace of manufacturing employment growth (at 41%) was fastest in rural areas adjacent to the largest metropolitan areas in the years  1998–2005. High -tech and other emerging manufacturing industries were seen to be moving away 
from the cores of metropolitan areas, but were relocating to the immediate suburbs and peripheries of these very cities and not to locations farther away. But the magn itude of suburbanization is not well 
measur ed due to a statistical measure, where places near metropolitan municipalities that look and feel 
urban are classified as rural. And when you zoom into these places, these “rural” suburban areas beyond the municip al boundaries of metropolitan cities have really high economic growth. In the statistics of 
urban/metropolitan areas, this looks like stagnation, but looking closer, we see suburbanization.   
8.3 NEED  FOR  THE  METROPOLITAN  PLANNING  COMMITTEE  (MPC)  AT THE  CITY  - REGION  
SCALE   
 
With a view towards planning and managing the current and inevitable future growth of the city- region, 
the MPC should be a body constituted a t the scale of the region (8,005  sq km of BMRDA jurisdiction) and 
not at the city municipal or development authority scale. The reasons are as follows:  
 
•Bengaluru  while being the primate in the region also requires its expanding activities to be 
accommodated elsewhere, and evidence indicates the inevitability of s uch activities choosing a 
location in its immediate region. Intra as well as inter settlement economic integration and 
inclusiveness emerges as a priority that needs to be managed by an MPC;  
•The dynamic peripheries of the expanding city fuelled by key fac ilities migrating to the region 
indicate land development occurs prior to any government regulated expansion and hence planning 
for the future requires a larger jurisdiction;  
•The current metropolitan region houses several ULBs that prepare their own master land use plans 
and projects with ambitious targets. These plans are almost contiguous to Bengaluru and needs a 
metropolitan regional authority for coordination, negotiation and cooperation purposes;  
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
   
Page : 190STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
 
•The ULBs and RLBs in the current Bengaluru Metropo litan Region includes 1 Corporation (BBMP), 3 
CMCs  (Ramanagaram, Channapattana, Doddaballapur), 7 TMCs (Devanahalli, Hosakote, Nelamangala, 
Vijayapura, Anekal, Kanakapura, Magadi) and 228 Panchayats (RLBs) covering 2511 Villages (as per 
census 2011) ; 
•If an MPC is set up for  Bangalore city ( ULB ), it will require a District Planning Committee (DPC) at the 
regional level for multi municipal and RLB coordination. Considering both an MPC and DPC will both require 2/3
rd elected members this will be a mere duplication and contain two separate politically 
heavy organisations trying to determine Bangalore’s future. Also due to Bangalore’s dominance in 
population numbers, more than 90% of the members of the DPC will anyway be from Bangalore;  
•Technically, the spi rit of setting up the MPC is to coordinate plans of at least two or more 
Municipalities or Panchayats. The Development (Master) Plan despite splitting up of the BBMP will  
remain a single plan as it is one city  and rules out any coordination of plans with other municipalities;  
•Functions, roles and responsibilities should be allocated based on scales of planning and could be done through an activity mapping exercise. The fear that such a large area cannot be managed will be 
mitigated if the role of the metro politan authority (MPC) does not overlap with that of a city authority 
or a ward committee and vice -versa;  
•The Bengaluru  Metropolitan Region Development Authority (BMRDA) enabled by the BMRDA Act, 
currently prepares a Structure Plan for the region coverin g an area of 8,005 sq  km. With this current 
institutional armature in place, improving its efficiency, functions and enabling mechanisms is a more 
viable and preferred option.  
 
8.3.1 Bengaluru  Metropolitan Region Perspective Strateg y, Structure  Plan  and Annual  Plan  
 
The BMRDA which will function as the technical secretariat of the MPC is to continue its task of 
preparation of the Regional Structure Plan. While The Model Urban & Regional Planning and 
Development Law ( Revised ) suggests both a Perspective Plan and a Development Plan, it is 
recommended  to avoid such duplication and time lag. A perspective Strategy shall set out broad policies 
and vision for a 20 year period whereas the Development Plan with a 5 year term  will detail  goals, 
object ives and priorities taking into account various sectoral requirements of panchayats and municipal 
bodies and their spatial implications within the metropolitan region.  Annual Plans will have tangible 
regional level projects linked to budgets for implementa tion.  
 As per the 74
th CAA and Model Planning Law, the MPC shall have regard to the plans prepared by the 
Municipalities and the Panchayats in the region. These plans will not essentially be changed by the MPC but a convergence through rationalization of the plans and policies prepared by local bodies  will be 
undertaken and provide a forum to resolve conflicts and  arrive at a comprehensive plan for the Region . 
The MPC will address matters of common interest (and common concern) between the municipalities a nd 
panchayats, coordinated spatial planning and economic development and social justice. Due regard to enabling the following will be undertaken:  
• Regional General Land Utilisation and Densities ; 
• Environment and Sustainability; 
• Integrated Transport ; 
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
   
Page : 191STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
• Regional Economic Development, Investments & Employment;  
• Integrated Infrastructure Development ; 
• Housing ; 
• Hazards, Disaster M anagem ent & Climate Change Mitigation;  
• Institutional Coordination in P lanning;  
• Policies, S chemes and  Regional Projects linked to clear budget outlays.  
 
As per the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act and the Model Urban & Regional Planning and 
Development Law (Revised) the following terminology are to be understood. The Metropolitan Region being discussed in this chapter is the ‘Metropolitan Area’ as per the Act for which a ‘Metropolitan Development Plan’ is to be prepared that gives due regard to the plans prepared by more than one Municipality and Panchayats in the Metropolitan Area. The city area which in this report is  the GBA  extent 
is similar to the ‘Local Planning Area’ for which a ‘Development Plan’ is prepared.  
8.4 PLANNING  FOR  BENGALURU  CITY   
8.4.1 The Current Process of Land Use based Master Planning is Ineffective  
 
The Master Plan for Bengaluru  is prepared for an area of 13 07 sq.km by the Bengaluru  Development 
Authority (BDA), which accommodated 8.95 million people as per Census 2011. This Master Plan (revised once in ten years) proceeds based on the frameworks laid down in the Karnataka Town and Country 
Planning Act, 1961 . This Act has not undergone ‘comprehensive’ revision in over 50 years other than 
undergoing need based and p iecemeal amendments over time. One of the key challenges in the Act is the 
standardized land use and zonal regulations oriented master plan that applies to any urban center irrespective of size, population and location in the State.   As indicated in Fig 8b, if the urban future of Bengaluru which is a city of 8. 95 million people (2011 
census) follows an identical planning process as that of Beltangadi,  a city of only 8,000 people , it clearly 
calls for a rethink of how metropolitan cities are prioritized, planned and managed.   Bengaluru facilitates access to resources, technological advancements, economies of scale, large labour markets and contributes to a significant share of national and state GDP. The urban planning frameworks for Bengaluru must vary from those of smaller cities facing very different and less complex challenges. With the second and third largest city in Karnataka (Hubli- Dharwad and M ysore) being barely 1/ 9
th the 
size of Bengaluru, it is a clear call to amend (or delink from) the KTCP Act 1961 to have a dedicated section for a contextual and relevant planning process for Bengaluru City.  
 
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
   
Page : 192STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Fig 8b: Spatial extent and population variation of urban centers in Karnataka  
Source: Land Use Land Cover -50K map/NRC, NRSC/ISRO – India , Census of India; Image  by EMBARQ - WRI India  
 
Pure Land Use based master plans have been documented to be ineffective1. They are known to face 
prolonged delays in preparation and sanctioning, as well as in implementation. There is no mandate for 
the integration of sectoral infrastructure plans and the plan remains an unheard voice in suggesting what 
needs to be done across sectoral agencies. Its implementability  is low, and is criticized for broad brushing 
out local specificities due to a generalized aggregated planning approach. Scales of Planning are missing as well as a lack of mandate for public participation. Sectoral  infrastructure implementation agencies 
discharge their duties as per their respective Acts and decide their own jurisdictions, plans, projects and implementation schedules . Inter -agency coordination which unmistakably determines the fate of the 
developmen t plan has been traditionally challenging. Inter -agency negotiation remains out of the scope of 
the development planning process. The marriage between the development plan and infrastructure (sectoral) plans does not happen within the current frameworks. The plan thereby remains irrelevant and outdated to address the city’s ever changing needs.  
 Cities in the United Kingdom and China, for example,  accord special status to  large cities. London  doesn't 
stop at just a spatial plan for the city;  it also prepares an economic development  strategy and a transport 
development strategy in conjunction with it to retai n its global competitive edge. L arger  municipalities in 
China such as Beijing, Shanghai,  Tianjin, and Chongqing have been accorded provincial status and hence 
are able to directly interact with the national government and employ different taxation norms. These 
municipalities with provincial status can implement  local  laws, regulations, and exercise unified 
administration over the economic, social, and cult ural affairs in areas under their respective jurisdictions.  
                                                             
1 Source: Alternate Approaches to Master Plans, SPA -MoUD, 2009; Core Group Report on T own Planning & Development 
Control  Process es in Maharashtra, AIILSG, 2007  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
   
Page : 193STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
8.5 STRATEGIC  SPATIAL  PLANNING  AS THE ALTERNATE  TO  LAND  USE  MASTER  PLANS  
 
Strategic Spatial Planning separates the visioning tool from the regulatory tool. It envisions the city’s 
future while formulating strategic decisions and projects that will help leapfrog over the current and potential challenges of the city. This tool is not legal in nature and serves as a platform for various stakeholders to freely express opinions, conduct negotiations, and arrive at agreements without the fear of repercussions. This negotiated planning method brings together various departments (plannin g, 
physical infrastructure, social infrastructure, and funding agencies) along with local businesses, religious groups, resident welfare associations, NGOs and citizens themselves. While the process could be messy to start with it results in a ‘co -produced ’ vision for the city.  
 
‘Strategic Spatial Planning endorses a development -led approach that aims to intervene more directly, 
more coherently and more selectively in social reality and development. This internationally employed tool moves away from regulatory ‘control’ based policy instruments of static land uses, purely market based solutions and statistical extrapolations. Growing awareness indicates that producing plans may not 
be considered as the main purpose of planning and that planning without imple mentation is futile’ . 
(Oosterlynck, Albrechts, Van den Broeck, 2010)  
 
While each situation and context requires a specific process; key features of  Strategic Spatial Planning are 
as follows2: 
•Components of a Strategic Spatial Plan : Developing a long term v ision and designing alternative 
futures, detailing short and long term projects, involving relevant actors and instruments needed to 
implement the strategic vision and participation and co -production of both policy and space;  
•Strategic projects are a key o utput of Strategic Spatial Planning : ‘Strategic’ planning entails 
choosing and prioritising certain goals and areas above others and are meant to be integrative and not only sectoral. Projects and actions envisioned have inter -sectoral implications and add ress the 
key challenge that needs to be resolved in a particular area;  
•Structural Impact:  Strategic projects target urban spatial fragments rather than necessarily the city 
as a whole and aim s for a structural impact and catalysing effect on the larger ur ban spatial system ; 
•Inter -stakeholder negotiations are to be part of plan making process: This type of planning is a 
co-produc ed socio spatial vision and process that requires horizontal as well as vertical cooperation 
within government agencies. Strategies and projects must stem from integration with the City Mobility Plan, City Economic Plan and various City Infrastructure Plans.  Inter -agency negotiations 
are to be part of the plan making process. Co -production also indicates involvement of various local 
groups and actors and bringing in social innovation that addresses local needs; 
•Strategic Spatial Plans are anchored by strong l eaders or agencies:  Strategic projects are to be 
embedded in long term visions shaped by values of diversity, social justice and equality. Strategic Spatial Planning is often anchored by a powerful local agency or political representative often being a may or in international contexts. The use of strategic projects should be introduced as an pro -
active instrument in spatial planning and to create specific bodies dealing with integrated projects and area focussed planning within the governmental in stitutions at all policy levels;  
                                                             
2 Sources: Planning - A Transformative Activity, Jef Van den Broeck , 44th ISOCARP Congress 2008; Strategic Spatial 
Projects - Catalysts for Change, StijnOosterlynck; Strategic Spatial Planning in European City -Regions, Simone Allin.  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
   
Page : 194STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
GREATER BENGALURU AUTHORITY (GBA)
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION (MC)
WARD 
Ward Plan
ZONE
Strategic Spatial Plan
and Strategic Projects 
Land Use Master Plan
Mobility Strategy
Economic Development 
Strategy
Infrastructure (Sectoral) Strategy
GBA
BDA
BMLTA (DULT)
BMRCL
BMTC etc
GBA Eco Dev cell
KIADB
KUIDFC 
Industry
GBA Infra cell
BWSSB
BESCOM
BDA etc
Ward Priority Aggregation 
Ward Committee
+ Area Sabha, RWAs
+ Civil Society Participation 
Compilation
Reviews
Projects and Schemes 
 Approved Budgets
Ward Committee
 Ward Committee
MPC - Regional Plan•Strategic spatial planning complements other planning tools : Strategic spatial planning differs 
from urban planning, as it complements other planning tools and usually results in a planning 
product such as a City Development Strategy  or City Structure Plan . Unlike land use planning this is 
not statutory but rather a flexible tool for long -term orientation that enables dynamic revision and 
adaptation to changin g and sensitive circumstances ; 
•Linking budgets with strategic projects:  Strat egic planning focuses, both in the short and the long 
term, on framing decisions, actions, projects and their implementation and incorporates a clear link to the budget, monitoring, evaluation, feedback, adjustment and revision.  
8.6 PLANNING  PROCESSES  FOR  THE  3 TIERED STRUCTURE  OF GBA  
 
With the inevitable need for a multi municipal structure for Bangalore, planning processes will follow a 3 tier structure, thus enabling planning at scales. The scales will be at the city level, multi municipal level (zonal) and  ward level.  
     
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
Fig 8c: Proposed Planning Process for the 3 tiered structure of GBA  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
   
Page : 195STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
8.6.1 The Strategic Spatial Plan ( GBA)  
The Strategic Spatial Plan  will be the key planning activity anchored by the GBA. The Vision and 
strategies for the city are to be  ‘coproduced’ for a period of upto 20 years ahead. The plan itself must be 
revis ed every 5 years to remain dynamic and relevant to present day needs  and tie in to the tenure of 
elected representatives such as the mayor . Integrated s trategic projects and actions which are a key  
outcome  of this exercise should be formulated in the short and long term and have clear linkages to 
budgets  and timelines . This pr oactive (non- legal) planning method and ensuing projects are based on 
convergence with key agencies dealing with Mobility, Economic Development and Infrastructure 
Development.  The key spatial structure plan that emerges will hence be the final agreement as  well as a 
negotiated commitment across agencies, stakeholders and citizens who  then commit to realizing and 
implementing this vision. These agencies hence will prioritize their own department’s plans, standards, 
projects and investment towards this unified larger city vision.  
8.6.2 The Mobility Strategy ( GBA) 
The Mobility Strategy  which is a key input into the Strategic Spatial Plan and prepared as coterminous is 
ideally prepared by an agency such as UMTA (Unified Metr opolitan Transport Authority such as the  
BMLTA) . UMTAs should function as  an umbrella body that regulates  the overall performance of the 
public transport system to ensure meeting the city’s comprehensive mobility needs. The UMTA needs to 
ensure multi modal  integration, and have a key role in decisions for significant public transport 
investments, have authority over strategic operations, negotiations, management policies  and contracts 
across all transportation modes. Agencies to be brought under this umbrel la include BMTC, BMRCL, 
Traffic Police, RTOs, parking policies, congestion taxes, t axis, auto rickshaws, private buses  etc. Linkages 
of mobility planning to land use and environmental planning are critical to sustainable urban development.  
8.6.3 The Economic Dev elopment Strategy (GBA)  
The Economic Development  Strategy  which is a key input into the Strategic Spatial Plan and prepared as 
coterminous is ideally prepared by an umbrella economic development cell. The strategy will set out the 
framework for the sustainable economic development of Bengaluru  so as to maximise on its potential 
for economic growth. Strategic transport investments like metro rail expansion (BMRCL) for example has a direct impact on urban and economic development and hence should be closely linked with the economic strategy for the city. The strategy will address long term as well as short term opportunities and will include aspects such as skill development, employment generation, tourism, city level infrastructure, new industry, supporting small and medium enterprises, peripheral settlements, derelict area regeneration, informal economies, wealth creation and social development etc. Agencies to be 
brought under this umbrella include KIADB, KUIDFC, the Department of Economics and Statistics, Industry and Trade organisations etc.  This is further detailed  in a later section.  
8.6.4 The Infrastructure (Sectoral)  Strategy  (GBA) 
The Infrastructure (Sectoral) Strategy which is a key input into the Strategic Spatial Plan and prepared 
as coterminous is ide ally prepared by an umbrella infrastructure development cell. I nfrastructure will 
drive s sustained economic growth when it is properly aligned with the city’s  priorities.  The city does not 
need only adequate power supply for instance but it also needs  high quality power, free of interruptions 
and free of voltage fluctuations. Similarly the provision and quality of services such as water supply, 
sewerage, drainage, solid waste management, telephone, internet etc is critical. Typically sectoral 
agencies operate under their own acts and jurisdiction s, resulting  in set ting their own priorities  and 
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
   
Page : 196STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
disengaged projections of demand. Sectoral  agencies too must follow a single vision for the city as 
mutually agreed and set out in the Strategic Spatial Plan. Post this agreement they may detail out their 
own sectoral master plans and project implementation schedules. When large scale infrastructu re 
projects like the Metro Rail are undertaken, it necessitates changes to the Strategic Spatial Plan and Statutory Land Use Plan. Hence, a short term “review” process should be taken up with a fixed mandate to be responsive to such changes. The i nfrastructure strategy should strive to  meet the increasing 
demand for infrastructure services both in terms of quantity and quality. Agencies to  be brought under 
this umbrella include BWSSB, BESCOM, BDA  etc. 
8.6.5 The Land Use Based Master Plan (GBA)  
The regulatory lan d-use plan which is a statutory document will provid e a legal certainty to the 
actionable inter sectoral  projects rolling out of the negotiated  Strategic Spatial Plan. Not only does this 
reinvigorate and make the traditional land use master plan an actionable plan directly linked to budgets and timelines, but it also will serve traditional functions such as giving out building permits and 
sanctions and helping to regulate violations. The zonal regulations and land use will continue to help the 
framing of detailed building bye laws by the municipalities. It will follow a 5 year revision process 
simila r to that of the Strategic Plan and can continue to be anchored by the technica l wing of the GBA 
which is the BDA.  
8.6.6 The Municipal Zone Plan (MC)  
The multiple municipalities falling within the purview of the GBA will help coordinate the 
implementation of strategic projects rolling out of the Strategic Spatial Plan  especially in routing and 
allocating budgets and permissions .  Municipalities will als o continue to detail out building bye laws 
from the zonal regulations of the land use master plan.  
As each municipality is expected to house about 80 wards, they also become the aggregators of ward 
plans.  Based on an aggregation of citizen driven ward plans, a rationalisation and prioritisation process will need to be carried out to negotiate which priorities will be taken up first and in which wards and its related financial allocations and sanctions. The municipal commissioner along with the mayor and t he 
zonal committee  will help to decide on such matters. They will also hence serve as the interface between 
the wards and the GBA and provide upward information and edits to the strategic plan and the 
regulating plan to ensure realistic and timely planning  and budget allocations.  
8.6.7 The Ward Plan (MC)  
The Ward Plan is the plan closest to citizens and hence must be prepared in ways that are participatory  
and is anchored by the ward committee . Involving people at local scales should not be a mere exercise 
to co -opt them in decision making but a way to introduce local knowledge and dynamism, local values, 
visions, concepts and solutions in processes and policies.  
At the scale of the Ward Plans, a further analysis of what polices, plans and projects are being impl emented in that ward ca n be discussed, contextualised  and objections and suggestions can be made 
to higher scales of plans . This includes the inter sectoral strategic projects, land use, built form and 
density, social and physical infrastructure, traffic and pedestrian movement, mobility and parking, 
heritage/important structure s, culture and character etc. Aspects that can be addressed and decided on 
at the ward scale itself can also be taken up such as complete street de sign including street furniture 
and utility location, local area improvements, local traffic circulation  and parking locations and supply , 
architectural and urban design prescriptio ns, plantation and local landscape etc.  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
   
Page : 197STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
Due cognizance of these ward  prior ities, at regular intervals, should go back upward to inform the 
strategic plan and the regulating plan to ensure realistic planning and budget allocations.  
It is evident that only a planning process that brings together various sectoral  agencies and depar tments 
through both horizontal and vertical integration  ensures dovetailing across scales of plans and involves 
various stakeholders especially citizens at important stages can ensure that the city meets its complex 
challenges and moves forward in sustaina ble and inclusive ways.  
8.6.8 How the Strategic Spatial Plan Pans Out  
As a hypothetical example, we can assume that one of the strategic projects chosen with the help of the Economic Development Strategy i s to develop an ‘ Garments or Aerospace ’ park  to access global 
economies and provide j obs for Bangalore’s qualified workforce. GBA anchors this process and provides 
the platform for inter departmental negotiations. Here, the BMTC for example may agree to provide buses on this route for better access even if it means a loss for the first few years; the BESCOM too agrees that a separate line will be provided to this development, but the BWSSB may state an inability to service this area due to lack of funds, manpower and other ongoing projects.  BWSSB however agrees that this project is crucial for the city and agrees to provide water supply in 5 years from now. The Strategic Spatial Plan hence lists this project in its priority pipeline, and decides that water supply will have to be managed through alternate means such as surface water bodies and bore wells for the first 5 years. This Strategic Project which is linked to clear budgets and timelines is then moved through the Statutory Land Use Plan into the Municipal and Ward Scales. Contextualization then occurs wit h ward 
committees, RWAs and citizens assessing on ground feasibility, discussions with land owners, compensation criteria, and project alterations based on challenges on ground etc. The suggested changes to the project and revised budgets are then reflected back up from the ward through the 
municipality to the GBA. Agreements and approvals are obtained at all scales and the project starts 
implementation on ground having taken all stakeholders on board. Sectoral infrastructure agencies and spatial planning and development agencies hence move in a more strategic, coordinated and timely 
manner.  
8.7 ECONOMIC  DEVELOPMENT  AGENCY  (EDA)  
The EDA is being discussed in some detail given its importance to the city’s investment and job creation climate. Economic Development Agencies must have skilled economic development planners, lawyers, 
financiers, negotiators and regulators. They must be able to work closely with the private sector as well as boost the public sector’s capabilities. Such agencies must be agile, have expert  advice and audit 
committees, and be transparent, public -facing, and communication -oriented. They must aim to combine 
long -term economic strategies with citizen services and high -quality living environments. An Economic 
Development Agency has to be built o n the following foundation:  
8.7.1 Economic development is knowledge and skills -enhancing; it builds long -term 
assets that benefit everyone; it is not real -estate development  
•Economic development is defined by a clear development of new forms of knowledge, skills, 
employment opportunities, and value addition -whether in agriculture, manufacturing, or services  
•A good economic strategy allows more jobs with long -term prospects, and industry diversification, 
with many ne w sectors emerging and thriving  
•Good econo mic development shows high backward and forward linkages with other sectors so the 
economy is dynamic and employment is skills -enhancing  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
   
Page : 198STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
•Economic development globally that has succeeded over the 20th century has shown clear 
advances in technological capabilities, benefits to the least fortunate, an d improvement of basic 
services  
•Economic development can take many forms, and does not require a manufacturing strategy alone. Agriculture and services -led advances can also be hugely beneficial, but only if they are 
accompanied by new knowledge, skills, employment opportunities, improved environmental 
indicators and better services. The value -addition lies in realizing these opportunities.  
8.7.2 Urban economic development is much more than economic growth; and its engin e 
is not real -estate/land value,  but skills and value -addition through upgrading.  
•Cities can have economic growth generated by speculation in land or by high investments, but their 
long -term economic development prospects may still be low  
•Land value increases and physical infrastructure add to economic growth, but the more important economic development gains come from long -terms skills improvements, services improvements, 
manufacturing productivity increases, health improvements from improved surveil lance, better 
waste processing, water and air quali ty, and environmental benefits  
•Real- estate development is simply real -estate development. It is not economic development unless 
tied to a much wider strategy that has demonstrable new knowledge, skills, em ployment 
opportunities, and long -term value -addition.  
8.7.3 Basic services can be a tremendous economic development opportunity  
•Economic development for India, Karnataka, and especially a city such as Bengaluru, can rest in an excellent mix of services improveme nts alongside agricultural advances and manufacturing  
•The lack of citizen services –from rapid response teams, medical care, tree -cutting, rain damage, 
traffic improvement  across the city - is in fact an excellent economic development opportunity.  It 
can provide opportunities for small and medium firms, it can enhance the reputation and 
capabilities of the public sector alongside, and it can strategically use technologies  to upgrade basic 
citizen needs  
•In improving basic service needs, firms and citizens alike become able to improve productivity, value-addition, and living quality  
•Strategic use of know -how can boost revenues to the state and to the city, by tying in service 
benchmarks with contracting f or economic development niches  
•Non -profits make up a su bstantial portion of critical linkages in any thriving economy.  
  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
   
Page : 199STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
 
For example, solid waste management (SWM) is an immense growth industry . Managed well, it not 
only provides for excellent service sector opportunities, but it also can have important econom ic 
development spill over into agricultural and environmental processing, as well as manufacture of 
equipment –such as sensors, meters, construction materials, and so forth.  
 
Similarly, complaints processing and response on -site  can act as a powerful way t o boost business 
opportunity and lessen the load for public agencies. Well -designed tree -cutting, sludge removal, debris 
removal, vehicle towing, fine enforcement, can improve the response time of many Bengaluru parastatal 
agencies as well as the BBMP and the police. Key Performance Indicators (such as speed of response, 
citizen approval, and fine collection) can determine the profit margins allocated to firms.  
 
Third-party audit and monitoring can also lead to certification systems for zones. This can simplify 
the basis by which budgets are allocated to zones and by which economic investment opportunities are 
channelled . 
 
Lake reclamation, kaluve cleaning, and watershed management, can be equally an economic 
development boost by working with non- profit organizations.
 
8.7.4 The informal economy has high growth and development potential  
•The urban informal economy is already an immense source of growth and GD P contributions for 
Bengaluru  
•However, there are many bottlenecks in terms of upgrading quality of activity and impr oving skills 
and value -addition  
•There are substantial economic development gains to b e made in sectors such as the:  
ofood industry, food retail corridors, associated safety and hygiene m onitoring and 
upgrading,  
i.Solid waste management  
ii.Communication, transportation and delivery services (from tempos for 
freight to couriers for other deliveries including e -retail)  
iii. Construction upgrading -especially on public infrastructure projects  
iv. Vegetable and flower markets  
v.Improved pollution controls and waste management 
There are many excellent examples in Asia alone of how improvements to the basic infrastructure in areas of heavy informal economic activity can boost revenues to the city, improve the co nditions of work 
of these workers, enhance their incomes, and address safety and hygiene.  
  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
   
Page : 200STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
 
In Bengaluru, V.V. Pura, Gandhi bazaar, K.R. Market, Thippasandra and others offer such potential, 
improving both informal and formal economic opportunities alike and providing important land value 
enhancement and alternate revenues to the city. When informal activity is counted and assisted, the 
associated productivity  and market value improvements can increase property revenues, property tax 
assessments, sales taxes, reputational gains to the city and state governments, and improvements  to 
tourism revenues. The ‘kadlekaiparishe’ of Basavangudi is an excellent example o f how to build 
economic development opportunities for the city based on deep cultural significance and existing 
economic activity.  
The Singapore government’s emphasis on street food improvements and local delicacies has led to 
increased revenues to the city as well as substantial gains to the cooks and traders and visibility for local 
innovations.  
 
8.7.5 Economic development  cannot  depend on free give-aways, but show enhanced 
public benefit  and long -term accounting   
•Discard old -style, discredited strategies such as tax -holidays and free land. Tax holidays, free land, 
energy, and other amenities damage the long -term prospects of the stat e and the city  
•Companies that invest or non -profits that put down roots must show  long -term benefits to the city  
•Economic development means accounting for all costs correctly. Such sops are not only a 
discredited strategy worldwide, unless they are linked to demonstrable benefits for the state that 
can be monitored, they also eat into revenues and generate many negative effects (e.g. environmental pollutants, noise,  traffic)  of their own that citizens later pay for in revenues and health loss  
•Companies that locate to a state and seek to lower their costs substantially through free or low -cost 
land or energy utilities, rarely have viable business plans. They seek to make large profits in the first few years and their long -term benefit to the city is deb atable  
•Priority for cities should be to attract companies -both private and public sector, big and small,  
interested in helping to  
oSolve specific high -priority urban or regional problems e.g. SWM, energy generating, water 
quality improvements, noise reduc tion  
oUpgrade the technological capabilities of the state -including investing in long- term 
infrastructure  
oTransfer technologies –including training and improving capabilities of local personnel.  
8.7.6 Economic development require s a specialized economic development agency  
•Bengaluru has been suffering from spatial and physical changes, including worsening road  traffic, 
noise, air and water availability and quality, that have caused economic investments which have no long -term planning. Entire sections of the city have experienced worsened quality of life, water 
bodies have been ruined, and children’s and adult  lung function has deteriorated  
•The agency must consolidate economic planning, guiding investments into critical needs, industrial 
transformation, land, transportation, noise, water, energy, and other amenities.  
 
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
   
Page : 201STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
8.8 BASIC:  BENGALURU  SPATIAL  INFORMATION  CENTRE  
Today many of the civic planning and service delivery agencies are using geospatial technologies in one 
form or other but the tragedy is agencies don’t kn ow the kind of datasets is available with others . Sharing 
procedures for data are not present , includ ing with the public . Multiple formats, standards, projections 
and scales make data hard to use across agencies and results in duplication of efforts.  
Government d epartments / Agencies are spending considerable amounts in acquiring high resolution 
satellite  images and hiring GIS consultants. These datasets created by multiple consultants are mostly 
fragmented, inconsistent and don’t follow national spatial data infrastructure (NSDI) guidelines of India 
or vendor neutral and inter -operability procedures.  
If Government wishes to take informed decisions and policy regulations,  a real time spatial repository is 
necessary to bring together different datasets from multiple agencies. Searching, collating and analysing 
data is a herculean task involving lot of time and effort. No single agency has taken up this task in a 
proper consistent manner. Top level administration is unable to get a holistic view of the ground level status and implementation levels of their programs.  
The Committee has invested considerable eff ort in putting together spatial (and some non- spatial) 
datasets across agencies onto a single platform. This was essentially necessary to make informed decisions about the current ground situation across multiple parameters (eg. demographics, infrastructur e, revenue, public spaces, etc.) and determine the size and shape of the proposed Mu nicipal 
Corporations. Exhibit 9A sets out the 102  layers currently built by the Committee.  This needs to be 
nurtured, kept current and disseminated to others (including the  public) based on acceptable protocols. 
Another 20 -25 layers have been identified. The maps generated through this exercise are set out in the 
Appendix. Some aggregate datasets currently available at a ward / street level:  
 
Parameter  Data  
Population # 201 1 84,43,675  
Area (sq kms)  709.49  
2011 Population density #/ sq km  11,901  
Households # (Census 2011)  21,01,831  
Buildings # 2014  11,97,164   
# Buildings > G+3  1,25,708  
Building plinth (sq m)  13,00,00,000  
Buildings built up (sq m)  33,14,87,474   
Road length (kms)  13,483   
Dry Waste Collection Centres #  196  
Lakes #  192  
Lakes area (sq m)  2,53,49,105  
Parks #  2,377  
Parks area (sq m)  1,34,15,243  
Playgrounds #  390  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
   
Page : 202STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
Parameter  Data  
Playground area (sq m)  26,00,834  
Police stations # 103 
Bus routes #  34,670  
Bus stops #  3,974  
Street lights #  4,21,113  
2011 HHs with underground drainage 
(%)  79  
2011 HHs with piped water (%)  71  
  
We have proposed setting up BASIC, a Bengaluru Spatial Information Centre enabled by an appropriate 
spatial repository act and housed in an appropriate organisation. More importantly, it is necessary to expose as much data as possible to the public and have them do data analytics, build applications that collectively helps improve the citizen experience in the city.  
8.8.1 Need f or Spatial Information Centre  
Bengaluru  is growingly rapidly and urgently needs uniform, large scale accurate spatial datasets for 
planning and monitoring of various developmental activities. This is also essential to provide consistent and reliable citizen centric services across all the wards and villages with in the city and the 
metropolitan area.  
This could be achieved by entrusting record keeping, updating, maintenance , sharing activities and 
custodian of this database to one single agency which could be created though enacting a “ Geo -spatial 
Act” for Bengaluru . This can be along the lines of the “ The Delhi Geo -Spatial Data Infrastructure 
(Management, Administration, Security and Safety) Act, 2011 ” - “In order to ensure the updated procedure 
in the spat ial and attribute datasets, the need to create a separate geospatial act is very much required to 
mandate keeping the data and services updated and current, conforming to the emerging technologies and standards”.  
This is also in line with the ‘National Dat a Sharing and Accessibility Policy, 2012’ by Department of 
science and technology, Government of India and also in line with Karnataka GIS initiative by Department of IT, BT and ST, Government of Karnataka.  
8.8.2 Objectives of BASIC  
To create an authoritative GIS database available to all agencies, enterprises and citizens 
•Establish single agency  
•Integration by bringing together the fragmented data from individual departments, standardise the 
mapping procedures and sharing protocols  
•Collect data from above the ground, on the ground and below the ground. Develop 2D and 3D geospatial information, applications and share with all users  
•Obtain updates from Government agencies, Departments, Public sources and keep the datasets up to date  
•Follow vendor neutral, platfor m neutral and interoperability principles.
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
 
   
Page : 203STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
8.8.3 Database Custodian  
An independent statutory agency (or at least executive agency) could be created to carry out the data 
collation, creation and updation for the enti re Bengaluru  metropolitan region (BMRDA footpri nt). This 
agency will  be the one point source for all the geospatial databases for the entire region. This newly 
created agency could be overseen (for the initial two/three years) by established agencies  such as 
Karnataka State Remote Sensing Application C enter (KSRSAC) or NIC or the Urban Mapping Centre at 
KUIDFC. The key expectations of the place where it is housed – competence in GIS, relevant 
infrastructure availability, appreciation of urban issues, staffing to follow up and keep the datasets current, p lanning and implementing new layers, additional attributes, etc.    
8.8.4 Area and mapping scale  
Bengaluru Metropolitan Region  should be bought under this act. Entire are should be mapped at 1:2000 
scale. For core area, i.e. Bengaluru  metropolitan area mapping s hould be done further in detail as 
suggested below.  
•Entire Bengaluru  Metropolitan Region (BMR):  1: 2,000  
•Core / Bengaluru  Metropolitan Area (BMA):  1: 1,000  
8.8.5 Mandatory sharing  
All the stake holders, local planning authorities, ULBs and other agencies rendering public services or involved in the creation of public assets in BMR should share the details with the geo -spatial agency 
created under this act.  
•Share geospatial data attributes pertaining  to the respective departments  
•Update existing databases in real time and share the same with the geo -spatial agency  
•Conform to the data structure and standards prescribed by the geo -spatial agency  
All departments use the datasets, maps, tools, programs created by the geo -spatial agency for their 
planning, administration and other major works  
8.8.6 Stakeholders  
We have listed most of the Government agencies that need to be part of BASIC:  
 
Municipal 
Corporations  BMRCL Police (Law &oOder Emergency Services
BWSSB  BESCOM  Traffic Police  Revenue  
BDA  PWD  Fire Force  Irrigation  
BMTC  KHB  Railways  Industries  
BMLTA / DULT Health Lake Devt. Authority  Education  
Statistics  Slum Clearance  Pollution Control  DC (Urban & Rural)  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
  
Page : 204  STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
EXHIBIT 8A 
Sector  Sub sector  Layer  Geospatial Information 
(available)  Projection  Feature  Count  Limits  Source  
Development
_Plans  BDA_Landuse  Existing_landuse Residential, commercial, industrial, 
Agriculture, Forest, villages, 
wasteland, others  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N Polygon  3685  BDA  BESCOM  
Development
_Plans  Layouts  BDA_layouts  Name of BDA Layout with village and 
hobli name, area, approval date, 
survey nos., no. of plots  GCS_WGS_1984  Point  232 BDA  CSTEP  
Development
_Plans  Layouts  Private_layouts  Name of layout with village and hobli 
name, area (acres -gunta), 
registration date, survey nos., no. of 
plots  GCS_WGS_1984  Point  256 BDA  CSTEP  
Development
_Plans  Layouts  Unauthorised_lay
outs  Location and address of 
unauthorised layouts with village 
name and status  GCS_WGS_1984  point  123 BDA  CSTEP  
Environment  Drainage  Watersheds  Extents of basins, watersheds, 
subwatersheds, mini watersheds and 
microwatersheds  Everest_Bangladesh_Poly
conic line 779 BDA  BDA  
Environment  Drainage  Watersheds  Extents of basins, watersheds, 
subwatersheds, mini watersheds and 
microwatersheds  Everest_Bangladesh_Poly
conic Polygon  303 BDA  BDA  
Environment  Drainage  Network  Length of natural drinage (network)  Everest_Bangladesh_Poly
conic line 3473  BDA  BDA  
Environment  Forests  Reserved_Forests  Name and location of Reserved 
forests in BMR limits  GCS_WGS_1984  Polygon  174 BMR  Forest 
Department  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
  
Page : 205  STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
Sector  Sub sector  Layer  Geospatial Information 
(available)  Projection  Feature  Count  Limits  Source  
Environment  Geology  Soil_types  Soil type, location and classification 
(order, suborder, group, subgroup, 
family, series, soil depth, texture, 
classification nos., etc)  Everest_Bangladesh_Poly
conic polygon  1721  BDA  BDA  
Environment  Geology  Lineaments  Data on structures/lLineaments  Unclassified  Line 1380  BDA  Mines & 
Geology  
Environment  Geology  Groundwater_pro
spects  Extents of ground water prospects 
(good to poor)  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N Polygon  703 BDA  BDA  
Environment  Landuse_landcover 
(LULC)  Landuse and 
Landcover  Landuse and Landcover (NRSC 
classifications - type -1,2 and 3)  Everest_Bangladesh_Poly
conic  Polygon  2849  BDA  BDA  
Environment  Openspaces  BDA_Parks_opens
paces  Location of park/open space with 
layout name, area (with 
measurements in E -W and N- S 
directions), date of handover to 
municipality  GCS_WGS_1984  Point  574 BDA  CSTEP  
Environment  Openspaces  Parks_playground
s Location and type (park or 
playground)  GCS_WGS_1984  polygon  287 BBMP  CSTEP  
Environment  Trees    Location of trees along major road 
corridors  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N point  275589  BDA  BDA  
Environment  Waterbodies  Lakes  Location and extents of waterbodies  Everest_Bangladesh_Poly
conic polygon  565 BDA  BDA  
Environment  Waterbodies  Lakes  Type, location and extents of 
waterbodyWGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3Npolygon  452 BDA  BESCOM  
Environment  Waterbodies  Rivers  Location of rivers  Unclassified  polygon  3 BMR  CSTEP  
Jurisdiction  Administrative  Hoblis  Hobli jurisdictions and names in 
BMA  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N polygon  16 BDA  BDA  
Jurisdiction  Administrative  Taluk  Name and extents of Taluk 
boundaries  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N polygon  4 BDA  BDA  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
  
Page : 206  STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
Sector  Sub sector  Layer  Geospatial Information 
(available)  Projection  Feature  Count  Limits  Source  
Jurisdiction  Administrative  ULBs_census_200
1 Name, location and primary census 
abstract details of census 2001 for 
ULBs in BMA  Unclassified  Polygon  8 BDA  BESCOM  
Jurisdiction  Administrative  BBMP_boundary  BBMP boundary  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N polygon  1 BBMP  BBMP  
Jurisdiction  Administrative  BBMP_zones  BBMP zones  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N polygon  8 BBMP  BBMP  
Jurisdiction  Administrative  BBMP_wards 
_MLAs  BBMP ward boundaries  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N polygon  198 BBMP  BBMP  
Jurisdiction  Electoral_Constitue
ncies  Assembly  Name and extents of assembly 
contituencies in BMA limits  Unclassified  polygon  28 BDA  BDA  
Jurisdiction  Electoral_Constitue
ncies  Parliament  Name and extents of parliament 
contituencies in BMA limits  Unclassified  polygon  5 BDA  BDA  
Jurisdiction  Electoral_Constitue
ncies  BBMP_MLAs  MLA constituencies within BBMP    Polygon  198 BBMP  BDA  
Jurisdiction  Fire Fire_stations  Name and location of fire stations WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N Points  13 BBMP  CSTEP  
Jurisdiction  Police  Division_limits  Name of the division  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N Polygon  7 BDA  Police 
Department  
Jurisdiction  Police  Subdivision_limits  Name of the subdivision and 
corresponding division name  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N Polygon  21 BDA  Police 
Department  
Jurisdiction  Police  Police_station_lim
its Name of the police station, its limits 
with subdivision and division names  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N Polygon  103 BDA  Police 
Department  
Jurisdiction  Postal  Pincode_limits  PIN code jurisdictions and post office 
name  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N Polygon  100 BDA  Open Source  
Mobility  Bus Bus_depots  Location of bus depot, Rickshaw 
stand  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N point  8 BDA  BESCOM  
Mobility  Bus Big_10_routes Bus route number and number of GCS_WGS_1983  Line 13   BMTC  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
  
Page : 207  STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
Sector  Sub sector  Layer  Geospatial Information 
(available)  Projection  Feature  Count  Limits  Source  
stops (en route)  
Mobility  Bus Bus_shelters  BMTC bus shelter name and location  GCS_WGS_1984  Point  1076    BMTC  
Mobility  Bus Bus_stops  Bus stop name, location and 
geocode ID  GCS_WGS_1984  Point  7686    BMTC  
Mobility Bus Bus_stations Major BMTC bus 
deports/stations/stops  GCS_WGS_1984 Point 116 BBMP BMTC
Mobility  Bus Bus_depots  Bus depot name, number, status, 
category, area, survey no., hobli, 
taluk, district  GCS_WGS_1985  Point  38   BMTC  
Mobility Bus Routes BMTC draft bus route number, 
origin, destination, distance, number 
of stops (en route)  GCS_WGS_1986 Line 2426 BMTC
Mobility  Bus Bus_stops  Bus stop name, location and bus 
route no.  GCS_WGS_1984  Point  5451    BMTC  
Mobility  Bus Bus_Terminals  Name and location of Interstate bus 
terminals  GCS_WGS_1985  Point  2 BBMP  CSTEP  
Mobility  Grade_separators  Flyovers_bridges  Flyovers/bridges in BMA limits  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N polygon  1071  BDA  BDA  
Mobility  Metro  Alignment  Alignment drawings in DWG format          BMRCL  
Mobility  Metro  Alignment_phase -
1Metro alignment   Line     BMRCL  
Mobility  Metro  Stations_phase -1 Metro stations    Point      BMRCL  
Mobility  Railways  Stations  Stations Name and location  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N Point  89   Railway  
Mobility  Railways  Network  Railway track alignment and guage 
type  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N line   BDA  BESCOM  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
  
Page : 208  STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
Sector  Sub sector  Layer  Geospatial Information 
(available)  Projection  Feature  Count  Limits  Source  
Mobility  Railways  Stations  Schematic alignment with existing 
stations names and proposed new 
lines in Bangalore division (in DWG 
format)          Railway  
Mobility  Railways  Network_polygon  Railway track alignment and gauge 
type    Polygon  1   Railway  
Mobility  Roads  Arterial_roads  Bangalore arterial roads  GCS_WGS_1984  Line 19 BDA  CSTEP  
Mobility  Roads  Road_Edges  Extents of road edge  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N polygon  38 BDA  BESCOM  
Mobility  Roads  Extents  Same as above in polygons    Polygon  327 BDA  BESCOM  
Mobility  Roads  Names  Road name (for some roads), length 
and type  PCS_Transverse_Mercato
r Line 218067  BBMP  BBMP  
Mobility  Roads  Center_lines  ID, Name, Type , Ward no, Ward 
name, Zone, Length    Line 92825  BBMP  BBMP  
Mobility  Traffic_Police Surveillance 
Cameras  Surveillance Cameras  kml Point  160   BTP 
Mobility  Traffic_Police Signals  Signal Lights (Old and New) kml Point  299   BTP 
Mobility  Traffic_Police Major_corridors  Corridors  kml Line 21   BTP 
Properties  BBMP  BBMP_offices  Name, location, address and contact 
no. of BBMP offices  GCS_WGS_1984  point  126 BBMP  CSTEP  
Properties  BDA  BDA_offices  BDA office locations with address 
and contact nos. zonewise  GCS_WGS_1984  point  5 BDA  CSTEP  
Properties  BESCOM  BESCOM_offices  Location of BESCOM office with 
address and phone number  GCS_WGS_1984  point  115 BBMP  CSTEP  
Properties  BWSSB  BWSSB_offices  Major BWSSB office location with 
address and contact no.  GCS_WGS_1984  Point  77 BBMP  CSTEP  
Properties  BMTC  BMTC_Properties  BMTC property name, area (as per 
records), survey no, hobli, taluk, GCS_WGS_1984  Polygon  235   BMTC  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
  
Page : 209  STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
Sector  Sub sector  Layer  Geospatial Information 
(available)  Projection  Feature  Count  Limits  Source  
district, status, category, photo  
Properties  Buildings  Individual_buildin
gs Individual building location, height 
and plinth area  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N polygon  1E+06  BDA  BDA  
Properties  Buildings  Buildings  Individual building location, type of 
use, footprint (plinth)  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N polygon  37220  BDA  BESCOM  
Properties  Plots  Individual_Plots  NPLNO,NPID, Street ID, Ngrid No, 
Notice no,Apl_no, OPID, 
OPLNo,NwardNo,NwardName, Zone, 
Usage, No_Floors, Floors, type, 
aplno0809, owner, address, no , 
category id, apt name, 
remarks,usage from date, npid old,    Polygon  1E+06  BBMP  BBMP  
Properties  Buildings  BBMP_offices  Name, location and address of BBMP 
officesGCS_WGS_1984  Points  126   CSTEP  
Properties  Buildings  BDA_offices  Zonewise and BDA head office 
location, address with contact nos.  GCS_WGS_1985  Points  5   CSTEP  
Properties Buildings Farm_houses Name and location of farm houses GCS_WGS_1984 Point 43 BBMP CSTEP
Properties  Grade_separators  Flyovers  Type of Flyover    Line 127   CSTEP  
Properties  Grade_separators  Flyovers  Type of Flyover    Polygon  97   CSTEP  
Properties  Fire Fire_stations  Name, location and contact no. of 
fire stations in Bangalore  GCS_WGS_1989  point  13 BBMP  CSTEP  
Properties  KEB KEB_offices  Name and location of KEB offices in 
Bangalore  GCS_WGS_1990  point  14 BDA  CSTEP  
Properties  Police  Police_stations  Name of the police station, PS no., 
division, subdivision, contact no.,   Point  107 BDA  CSTEP  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
  
Page : 210  STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
Sector  Sub sector  Layer  Geospatial Information 
(available)  Projection  Feature  Count  Limits  Source  
CUG no.  
Properties  Traffic_Police Stations  Police station name, location and 
contact details  kml Point  33 BDA  Police 
Department  
Properties  KSPCB  KSPCB_offices  Location, address and contact no. of 
state pollution board offices  GCS_WGS_1984  point  3 BBMP  CSTEP  
Utilities  BESCOM  BMAZ_limits  Extents of BESCOM Bangalore zone  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N polygon  1   BESCOM  
Utilities  BESCOM  Zone_limits  Bangalore Zone boundary WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N polygon  3   BESCOM  
Utilities  BESCOM  Division_limits  Name and extents of BESCOM 
divisions in Bangalore zone  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N polygon  12   BESCOM  
Utilities BESCOM Subdivision_limits Extents of BESCOM subdivisions in 
Bangalore zoneWGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N polygon 42 BESCOM
Utilities  BESCOM  Circle_limits  Name and extents of BESCOM  
circles, divisions and subdivions in 
Bangalore metropolitan area zone  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N polygon  48   BESCOM  
Utilities  BESCOM  Section_limits  Name  and extents of BESCOM 
sections in Bangalore zone  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N polygon  131   BESCOM  
Utilities  BESCOM  Sections_hierarch
y Name and extents of BESCOM  
circles, divisions, subdivions and 
sections in Bangalore metropolitan 
area zone  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N polygon  131   BESCOM  
Utilities  BWSSB  Subdivision_limits  Name and subdivisions number  PCS_Transverse_Mercato
r Polygon  31   BWSSB  
Utilities  BWSSB  Division_limits  Name of the division  PCS_Transverse_Mercato
r Polygon  9   BWSSB  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
  
Page : 211  STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
Sector  Sub sector  Layer  Geospatial Information 
(available)  Projection  Feature  Count  Limits  Source  
Utilities  BWSSB  Service_stations_l
imits Name of the service stations with 
division details  PCS_Transverse_Mercato
r Polygon  110   BWSSB  
Utilities  BWSSB  Manholes  Manholes - location, type, material, 
depth, month & year of installation,  
cover state, cover material, SSID, etc.  PCS_Transverse_Mercato
r Point  164368    BWSSB  
Utilities  BWSSB  Sewer_network  Sewer Lines - pipe alignment, length, 
flow type, diameter, material, month 
& year of installation, joint type, ss  
managed,  replaced year, name of 
contractor, etc.PCS_Transverse_Mercato
r Line 54424    BWSSB  
Utilities  BWSSB  Valves  Valve location, type, diameter, 
material, operation type, month & 
year of installation, etc  PCS_Transverse_Mercato
r Point  31437    BWSSB  
Utilities  BWSSB  Water_pipes  Water pipe line alignment, type, 
length, diameter, material, month & 
year of installation,  joint type, SSID, 
etc. PCS_Transverse_Mercato
r Line 64354    BWSSB  
Utilities  BWSSB  Drainage_netwro
k Name, location and length of drain 
network  PCS_Transverse_Mercato
r Line 1339  BDA  BWSSB  
Welfare  Education  Schools  School name, 
location,administration type, year 
established, staff and student nos., 
medium of instruction, no. of 
computers, classrooms, toilet nos. 
(sepeartely for girls &  boys), etc  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N Point  5443  Bangalor
e urban 
and rural 
districts Akshara 
Foundation  
Welfare  Food_Civil_supplies  KFCSC  Name, location, address, contact no. 
of food and civil supplies corporation 
units    Point  5 BBMP  CSTEP  
Welfare  Health  Hospitals  Name and location of hospitals  GCS_WGS_1984  Points  454   CSTEP  
                                                                                                                                            
 
 
  
Page : 212  STRATEGIC AND SPATIAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK  
Sector  Sub sector  Layer  Geospatial Information 
(available)  Projection  Feature  Count  Limits  Source  
Welfare  Health  Hospitals  Hospitals name, location, address, 
speciality, certified status,  no. of 
beds, type - Govt./Pvt., contact no., 
etc GCS_WGS_1984  point  135 BBMP  CSTEP  
Welfare  Amenities  Civic_amenities  Layout wise civic amenity site 
location with site area, no., allotee 
and purpose  GCS_WGS_1984  point  890 BBMP  CSTEP  
Welfare  Birth_Death  Cremation_burial 
grounds  Name and location of 
cremation/burial grounds in 
Bangalore  GCS_WGS_1984  Point  12 BBMP  CSTEP  
Others  Facilities  Landmarks  Name, location, address and contact 
nos. of facilities (clinics, clubs, 
colleges, hotels, libraries, 
pharmacies, temples, police stations, 
pubs, restaurents, etc.)  unclassified  Points  12705    CSTEP  
Others  Facilities  Railway_ 
Reservation_Cent
ers Name, location and address of 
railway ticket reservation counters  GCS_WGS_1984  Point  8 BBMP  CSTEP  
Others  Landmarks  Landmarks  Name and location of major 
landmarks  WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_4
3N point  448 BDA  BESCOM  
Others  Landmarks  Landmarks  Landmarks withaddress    Points  54889    ONZE  
Others  Landmarks  Landmarks  Landmark name and location  PCS_Transverse_Mercato
r Point  14341  BDA  ONZE  
Others  Settlements  Village_geocodes  Location of settlements in BMR (No 
data inside Bangalore urban district 
and partial data outside)  GCS_WGS_1984  Points  1473    ONZE  
  
 
  
APPENDIX  - I: OBJECTIVES AND GUIDING PRINCIPLES  
Page : A-1 APPENDIX  I: OBJECTIVES  AND  GUIDING  PRINCIPLES 
CONTEXT  
A 3 member Expert Committee on BBMP Restructuring (EC: BBMP Restructuring) was set up by the 
Government of Karnataka (GoK) on Sept 22, 2014 with an initial focus on recommending the best way ahead for the division of the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagar  Palike (BBMP). On reconsideration, with a 
view to significantly improve the quality of living in Bengaluru region over the long run, the scope was enhanced to ‘Restructuring  BBMP’ on Nov 19, 2014 (Appendix II ). The 3 members of the Committee 
were Mr. B.S. Patil, Former Chief Secretary, Mr. Siddaiah, Former BBMP Commissioner and Mr. V. 
Ravichandar, Former Bangalore Agenda Task Force (BATF) member.  
Between mid - November 2014 and end -May 2015, the Committee met with over 1,000 Stakeholders 
(48 elected representatives, senior officials of 20 government agencies, Institutional groups, Resident 
Welfare Associations, NGOs, etc.). A web site , www.bbmprestructuring.org, was set up as a two way 
communication platform between citizens and the Expert Committee. The Committee reviewed best practices (Domestic / International), citizen suggestions, set up teams for analysing spatial databases, publ ic finances, HR, governance / administration, activity mapping, legal aspects, scenario analysis and 
had multiple internal discussion sessions.  
A preliminary report was submitted to the Chief Minister, GoK on Dec 23, 2014 based on a month’s work of the Exp ert Committee. This report focused on learnings from other cities and inputs from 
initial discussions with Stakeholders. Six months’ time till end June 2015 was sought to meet the 
Committee’s objectives. On Mar 18, 2015, a second interim report was submitted to GoK. This report 
focused on feedback from Stakeholders and the Committee’s thinking on the need of a 3 tier governance and administration structure with a multiple municipal corporation set up as the foundation for a new Bengaluru. The city is currently reeling under severe infrastructure and service delivery woes accentuated by a rapidly growing metropolis – its decadal growth of 44.5% during 
2001- 11 was the highest in the world for cities of comparable size and spread. Its current population 
of arou nd 10 million is expected to grow to over 20 million by 2041 and unless systemic, proactive 
measures are taken to manage the growth, Bengaluru’s woes would worsen.  
 
  
 
  
APPENDIX  - I: OBJECTIVES AND GUIDING PRINCIPLES  
Page : A-2 THE  OBJECTIVES  FOR  THE  EC:  BBMP  RESTRUCTURING  EXERCISE  
The Government order sets out the key objectives for the Expert Committee:  
•To improve the quality of living and living environment in the city both in the short term and long 
term  
•To advice the Government to create appropriate governance / administration systems and infrastructure for Benga luru to meet the increased expectations of citizens  
•Suggest steps to be taken to make Bengaluru as one among top 50 cities.  
•Suggest specific actions to be taken to restructure BBMP including any division that might be required.  
GUID ING  PRINCIPLES  FOR  EC:  BBMP  RESTRUCTURING  
Any exercise of this nature needs to be anchored in a few guiding principles. At the outset, the 
Committee decided to adopt the following principles as it went about its tasks in meeting the overall 
objectives:  
•Citizen centric, demand dr iven exercise  
oThe focus is about improving quality of living for all citizens in Bengaluru. So emphasis on 
citizen needs, access and services provisioning  
oOutcome orientation; City service providers to align themselves based on citizen 
expectations; Integr ated thinking   
•Spirit and recommendations of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act (CAA)  
oMetropolitan Planning Council (MPC) for the region 
oWard committees strengthening at the lowest tier of city governance  
•Futuristic outlook  
o2041 time horizon; Solutions  to stand the test of time  
oScalable over time  
•Reinforce Brand Bengaluru  
oThe pre -eminence of the Bengaluru brand globally to be further strengthened  
oIncrease ability to attract investments and create jobs  
•Accountability of elected representatives and service providers to citizens  
oGive voice to citizens and citizen groups though institutional mechanisms  
oCitizen participation; Role for citizen beyond casting a vote at election time  
  
 
  
APPENDIX  - I: OBJECTIVES AND GUIDING PRINCIPLES  
Page : A-3 •Trust building through transparency measures 
oProactive disclosure by Gove rnment agencies as the norm  
oChecks and balance at every level of governance / administration 
•Focus on Institutions and Human Resources  
oBuild robust institutional structures with  clarity on roles and responsibilities  
oCadre, Recruitment and Capacity building measures  
•Embrace the power of technology  
oIn every aspect of civic governance, services delivery  
oTwo way communication . 
  
 
  
Page : A-4 APPENDIX – II : GOVERNMENT ORDER  
APPENDIX  II: GOVERNMENT  ORDER  
 
N O T I F I C A T I O N
Subject : Regarding division of the Bruhat Bangalore MahanagaraPalike 
Ref : Letter bearing No. Sasa/Na/1296/2013, dated: 22/08/2013 received from Minister of 
Transport and Bangalore District In charge  
 
Bangalore Metropolitan Corporation earlier covered an area of 226 sqkms. Bruhat Bengaluru 
MahanagaraPalike was formed with effect from 16.01.2007.  Currently, it covers an area of 
800 sqkms and comprises of 8 zones. With such rapid growth of Metropolitan Corporation on 
a day by day basis, the providing basic amenities and facilities to people has become the main 
responsibility of BBMP.  But, from an administrative perspective managing this in an organized manner is posing a great challenge.  
2. Mumbai, one of the four metropolitan cities, covers an area of 603 sqkms and for effective 
administration it has 8 municipal corporations and 9 ward committees.  
3. Similarly, Kolkata Municipal Corporation has 186 sqkms and has 100 municipal corporations and 38 ward committees.  Due to administrative challenges, former Delhi Municipal Corporation has been divided into 3 separate Municipal Corporations.  
4. Though London, which is one of the famous international cities, has a population equivalent  
to Bangalore it has 32 separate Boroughs  
5. The above mentioned points have been discussed in detail in the meeting held on 12.08.13 conducted by Minister of Transport.  Based on the views expressed in the meeting, Minister of Transporthas requested the Government to appoint an expert committee to  study the division 
of BBMP in detail, take public opinion and study the same carefully, ensure that the report from the committee is submitted within a stipulated time, and based on the report take a 
suitable decision on division of BBMP.  
6. There are many issues related to the administration of BBMP like solid waste management 
has worsened and there are many Public interest litigations pending in the high court related 
to this. Yet no proper waste management program has been implemented.  Besides, the 110 villages around Bangalore which have been added to BBMP are yet to be provided basic 
facilities like drinking water and good road connectivity .    
  
 
  
Page : A-5 APPENDIX – II : GOVERNMENT ORDER  
7. Considering the above issues, the Government has decided to divide BBMP in order to 
improve the ease of administration and to provide basic amenities / facilities to the people.  
But before that, Government has decided to appoint an Expert committee, ensure that the 
committee submits the report within stipulated time, get public opinion based on the report and make an appropriate decision.    Hence the following order  
 
Government Order No. : NaAaE 484 MNY 2013, Bangalore,  Date: 22-09-2014  
 
8.As per the reasons outlined in the proposal, the following experts have been appointed  to study and submit a report regarding the division of BBMP  
 
1.Mr. B. S. Patil IAS (R)  
Retired Chief Secretary  
Government of Karnataka, Bangalore - Chairman  
2.Mr. Sidd aiah IAS(R)  
Retired Commissioner  
BBMP & BDA, Bangalore   - Member  
 
3.Mr.  Ravichandar  
Member  
Former Bangalore Agenda Task Force, Bangalore   - Member  
 
9.  Additional Commissioner (Administration), BBMP is requested to provide all necessary 
information required for the above committee and also manage all co -ordination efforts to 
organize related meetings as required.  
10.  This committee is required to study in detail about the division of BBMP and submit the report in next three months.  
11. Commissioner,  BBMP has been ordered to provide this expert committee necessary 
facilities like Office, Staff, Furniture and fixtures, Vehicles, etc.   
 
Addendum Notice – 19.11.2014  
Government under its notification NaAaEe/484/NMY/2013 dated 22/09/2014, had formed 
an expert team to advice Government on division of the Bruhat Bangalore MahanagaraPalike 
under the chairmanship of Mr. B. S. Patil, IAS, Retired Chief Secretary, Government of 
Karnataka.  It is requested to include the below mentioned points after Sl. No. 10 of the above mentioned notification.  
 
  
 
  
Page : A-6 APPENDIX – II : GOVERNMENT ORDER  
1.To improve the quality of living and living environment in the city both in the short 
term and long term  
2.To advice the government to create suitable government systems and infrastructure to 
Bengaluru including increased  services expected by citizens
3.Suggest steps to be taken to make Bengaluru as one among the 50 best cities  
4.Suggest specific actions to be taken to restructure BBMP.  
For and As directed by  
Governor of Karnataka 
 
 
N Gopalaiah  
Government Under Secretary  
City Development Department (BBMP)  
 To: 
 
1.Chief Accountant (A&E) / (G&SSA)/(E&RSA), Karnataka, Bangalore 
2.Head Accountant, Karnataka, Bangalore 
3.Principal Secretary, Government of Karnataka, VidhanaSoudha, Bangalore 
4. Chief Secretary, Chief Minister's office, VidhanaSoudha, Bangalore 
5.Commissioner, BBMP, Bangalore 
6.Mr. B. S. Patil, IAS (R), Retired Principal Secretary, Government of Karnataka, Bangalore 
7.Sri Siddaiah, IAS (R), Retired Commissioner, BBMP & BDA, Bangalore 
8.Mr. Ravichandar, Former Member, Bangalore Agenda Task Force, Bangalore  
9.Personal Secretary to Minister of Transport and City Development, VikasaSoudha, 
Bangalore  
10. Personal Secretary to  Additional Principal Secretary, City Development Department, 
VikasaSoudha, Bangalore 
11. Personal Secretary to Principal  Secretary, City Development Department, VikasaSoudha, 
Bangalore  
12. Deputy Secretary 1, City Development Department, VikasaSoudha, Bangalore 
13. Branch Security file / Internet Department / Additional Copies / Compendium  
(Translated from Kannada ) 
 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-7 APPENDIX  III: ACTIVITY  MAPPING   
Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Arts & Culture  Conducting functions & ceremonies  BBMP  MC MC MC N/A Zone  Zone  No Yes 
Birth & Death Providing Burial/Cremation services BBMP CPU GBA Zone N/A Zone Zone No No
Birth & Death  Issue of Birth & Death Certificates  BBMP  CPU  MC N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Complaints 
Handling  Setting up & operating helpline  BBMP  MC MC MC MC MC MC Yes No 
Complaints 
Handling  Establishment & operation of Public Grievance 
Redressal cell  BBMP  CPU  MC MC MC Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Emergency 
Services  Management of natural calamities  BBMP  State GBA MC N/A Ward Zone  No Yes 
Emergency 
Services  Putting up shops/stalls for the sale of 
necessaries of life during famine BBMP  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No Yes 
Information  Releasing publications  BBMP  CPU  N/A MC N/A MC MC Yes No 
Information  Issuing advertisement & publicity material to 
public  BBMP  MC N/A Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Information  Dissemination of information under RTI  BBMP  External  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Public 
Conveniences  Establishment of Citizen Service  Centres  BBMP  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes Yes 
Service Fees  Clearing vacant sites BBMP  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No Yes 
Service Fees  Sale of Publications, Booklets, Forms  BBMP  MC MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Statistics  Conducting Census  BBMP  External  MC MC N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Statistics  Management of computerised records  BBMP  CPU  N/A MC N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-8 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Sustainability  Removing noxious vegetation & abating all 
public nuisances  BBMP  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Sustainability  Undertaking techno feasibility / EIA studies  BBMP  CPU  N/A MC N/A MC MC Yes No 
Systems  Revenue Accounting  BBMP  State MC MC N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Systems  Expenses Accounting  BBMP  State MC MC N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Systems  Working Capital Management  BBMP  MC MC MC N/A Zone  MC Yes No 
Systems  Financial Management  BBMP  MC MC MC N/A MC MC Yes No 
Systems  Debt Servicing  BBMP  MC N/A MC N/A MC MC Yes No 
Systems  Revenue Budgeting  BBMP  State MC N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Systems  Expenditure Budgeting at Ward  BBMP  State MC MC N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Systems  Expense Budgeting at Zone and higher  BBMP  State MC MC N/A Zone  MC Yes No 
Systems  Capital Budgeting  BBMP  State MC Zone  N/A MC MC Yes No 
Systems  Budget Approval  BBMP  State MC MC N/A MC MC Yes No 
Systems  Recruitment of staff  BBMP  State MC MC N/A Zone  MC No No 
Systems  Payroll Processing  BBMP  State MC N/A N/A MC MC Yes No 
Systems  Pension Payment  BBMP  State MC N/A N/A MC MC Yes No 
Systems  Employee Training and Capacity Building  BBMP  State MC MC N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Systems  Procurement and Maintenance of IT assets  BBMP  State MC MC MC Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Systems  Implementation of improvement projects  BBMP  MC MC MC N/A MC MC Yes No 
Systems  Safeguarding IT assets  BBMP  MC MC MC N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Systems  Establishment and Operation of Central 
Control Room  BBMP  State GBA MC MC MC MC Yes No 
Systems  Establishment and maintenance of facilities  BBMP  MC N/A MC N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Systems  Procurement and Maintenance of Assets for 
Operations  BBMP  MC N/A MC N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-9 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Systems  Support function to Council and Committees  BBMP  MC N/A MC N/A MC MC No No 
Systems  Advertisement and Publicity - General  BBMP  MC N/A MC N/A Zone  MC No No 
Urban Planning  Establishment & operation of Geographical 
Information System  BBMP  CPU  MC MC MC Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Welfare  Management of the old -age & widow pension 
schemes  BBMP  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Public 
Conveniences  Removal of unauthorised hoardings  BBMP - 
Advertisements  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Service Fees  Licensing of advertisement hoardings  BBMP - 
Advertisements  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Taxes  Collection of Advertisement Tax  BBMP - 
Advertisements  CPU  MC MC N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Veterinary  Ambulances for domestic animals  BBMP - Animal 
Husbandry  State MC Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Veterinary  Establishment & maintenance of cattle pounds  BBMP - Animal 
Husbandry  State MC MC Zone  Zone  Zone  No No 
Arts & Culture  Conducting ceremonies & functions  BBMP - Culture 
& Sports  MC N/A Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  No Yes 
Fitness  Conducting physical education & sports 
training BBMP - Culture 
& Sports  CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Fitness  Organising rallies & sport tournaments  BBMP - Culture 
& Sports  CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No Yes 
Fitness  Purchase & maintenance of sports equipment  BBMP - Culture 
& Sports  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Heritage  Installation of statues & memorials  BBMP - Culture 
& Sports  CPU  N/A MC MC N/A Zone  No No 
Heritage  Protection of public property within the 
heritage area  BBMP - Culture 
& Sports  CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Zone  MC No No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-10 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Heritage  Preventing uncontrolled development of the 
heritage area & commercial exploitation of the 
area  BBMP - Culture 
& Sports  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Heritage  Conservation of cultural heritage buildings  BBMP - Culture 
& Sports  State N/A GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  No No 
Information  Bringing out films & documentaries on Culture 
& Heritage  BBMP - Culture 
& Sports  State N/A GBA  GBA  N/A GBA  No No 
Recognition & 
Awards  Institution of awards & recognitions  BBMP - Culture 
& Sports  CPU  N/A MC N/A MC MC No No 
Welfare  Distribution of contribution & grants in aid  BBMP - Culture 
& Sports  MC MC MC N/A MC MC No Yes 
Arts & Culture  Conducting ceremonies & functions  BBMP - 
Education  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  N/A Yes 
Education  Purchase of band sets & sports equipment for 
SchoolsBBMP - 
EducationCPU  N/A Zone  Ward  N/A Zone  Yes No 
Education  Distribution of study materials  BBMP - 
Education  External  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Education  Introduction of distance education 
programmes  BBMP - 
Education  External  N/A MC N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Education  Printing of question papers  BBMP - 
Education  External  MC Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Education  Organising study tours  BBMP - 
Education  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  No No 
Education  Installation & maintenance of computers in 
Schools  BBMP - 
Education  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Education  Establishment & maintenance of labs  BBMP - 
Education  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Education  Purchase & maintenance of lab equipment  BBMP  - 
Education  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes No 
Education  Organising NCC & scouts & guides programme  BBMP - CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-11 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Education  
Education  Security & house keeping of Schools & 
CollegesBBMP - 
EducationCPU  MC Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  No No 
Livelihood 
Creation  Establishment & maintenance of training 
centres  BBMP - 
Education  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Public Health  Conducting health check up for school children  BBMP - 
Education  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Recognition & 
Awards  Institution of awards & recognitions  BBMP - 
Education  MC MC MC N/A Zone  MC No Yes 
Service Fees  Collection of rent from Schools & playgrounds  BBMP - 
Education  MC N/A Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Welfare  Distribution of uniforms, sweaters & school 
bags  BBMP - 
Education  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Welfare  Providing facilities & operations for Mid -day 
meals  BBMP - 
Education  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Welfare  Distribution of stipends & scholarships  BBMP - 
Education  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Arts & Culture  Construction & maintenance of art galleries  BBMP - 
Engineering  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Education  Construction & maintenance of Education 
buildings  BBMP - 
Engineering  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  No Yes 
Education  Construction of student hostels  BBMP - 
Engineering  CPU  N/A Zone  Zone  N/A Zone  Yes No 
Public 
Conveniences  Construction & maintenance of community 
halls  BBMP - 
Engineering  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  No Yes 
Public 
Conveniences  Construction & maintenance of Libraries & 
reading rooms  BBMP - 
Engineering  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Public 
Conveniences  Establishment & operation of e -libraries  BBMP - 
Engineering  MC MC MC MC MC MC Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-12 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Public 
Conveniences  Construction & maintenance of multi level 
parking complexes  BBMP - 
Engineering  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Public Health  Construction & maintenance of Hospital 
buildings  BBMP - 
Engineering  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  No No 
Public Health  Construction & maintenance of sanitary 
houses for the habitation of the poor  BBMP - 
Engineering CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  No Yes 
Public Health  Construction & maintenance of public bathing 
houses  BBMP - 
Engineering  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  No Yes 
Registration  Providing permission for OFC laying  BBMP - 
Engineering  CPU  MC N/A N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Roads  Construction & maintenance of Railway Over 
Bridge & Railway Under Bridge  BBMP - 
Engineering CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Roads  Construction & maintenance of Sub -ways  BBMP - 
Engineering  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Roads Construction & maintenance of flyovers, 
underpasses, grade separators & bridges  BBMP -
Engineering  CPU MC Zone Zone Zone Zone Yes No
Roads  Improvements to flyovers, underpasses, grade 
separators & bridges  BBMP - 
Engineering CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Roads  Improvement & strengthening of arterial 
roads  BBMP - 
Engineering  CPU  GBA GBA  GBA  GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Roads  Improvement & strengthening of sub arterial 
roads  BBMP - 
Engineering  CPU  MC MC Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Veterinary  Construction & maintenance of Abattoirs  BBMP - 
Engineering  CPU  N/A Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  No No 
Veterinary  Construction & maintenance of veterinary 
hospitals  BBMP - 
Engineering  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Water  Digging of bore wells  BBMP - 
Engineering  CPU  N/A Zone  Ward  N/A Zone  Yes Yes 
Water Establishment of distribution network BBMP -
Engineering  CPU N/A MC Zone N/A MC Yes No
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-13 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Water  Ensuring regular water supply in Main lines  BBMP - 
Engineering  CPU  MC MC N/A Zone  MC Yes No 
Water  Ensuring regular water supply in Tertiary Lines 
Feeder  BBMP - 
Engineering  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Water  Ensuring regular water supply in Households  BBMP - 
Engineering  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Water Establishment & maintenance of water 
distribution network in Main Lines  BBMP -
Engineering CPU MC Zone Zone Zone Zone No No
Water  Establishment & maintenance of water 
distribution network in Tertiary Lines  BBMP - 
Engineering CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  No No 
Water  Establishment & maintenance of water 
distribution network for  Households  BBMP - 
Engineering CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  No Yes 
Birth & Death  Providing burial/Cremation services  BBMP - 
Engineering - 
Electrical  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Energy  Installation & maintenance to electrical 
installations BBMP - 
Engineering - 
Electrical  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes No 
Energy  Monitoring of non burning bulbs  BBMP - 
Engineering - 
Electrical  MC MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Energy  Outsourcing of street light maintenance  BBMP - 
Engineering - 
Electrical  CPU  N/A MC N/A Zone  Zone  No No 
Energy  Provision & maintenance of street lights  BBMP - 
Engineering - 
Electrical  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes Yes 
Energy  Shifting of electrical lines  BBMP - 
Engineering - 
Electrical  CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-14 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Service Fees  Collection of charges for electric crematoria  BBMP - 
Engineering - 
Electrical  MC MC N/A N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Roads  Construction & maintenance of Main Roads & 
Bridges BBMP - 
Engineering - 
Roads  CPU  MC Zone  GBA  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Roads  Construction & maintenance of Arterial Roads  BBMP - 
Engineering - 
Roads  CPU  GBA GBA  GBA  GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Roads  Construction & maintenance of Sub -arterial 
Roads  BBMP - 
Engineering - 
Roads  CPU  MC MC Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes Yes 
Public Health  Covering open drains  BBMP - 
Engineering - 
Storm Water 
Drains  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  N/A Zone  Yes Yes 
Roads  Establishment & maintenance of storm water 
drain network  BBMP - 
Engineering - 
Storm Water 
Drains  CPU  GBA GBA  GBA  GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Roads  Remodelling of storm water drains  BBMP - 
Engineering - 
Storm Water 
Drains  CPU  GBA GBA  GBA  GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Roads  Undertaking desilting of storm water drains  BBMP - 
Engineering - Storm Water 
Drains  CPU  GBA GBA  GBA  GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Public 
Conveniences  Development of Parking Spaces  BBMP - 
Engineering - 
Traffic CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  No No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-15 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Engineering 
Cell 
Public 
Transport  Formation & operation of bus stands, bus bays 
& auto rickshaw stands  BBMP - 
Engineering - 
Traffic 
Engineering 
Cell CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Roads  Construction & maintenance of skywalks  BBMP - 
Engineering - 
Traffic 
Engineering 
Cell CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes Yes 
Roads  Construction & maintenance of cycling lanes  BBMP - 
Engineering - 
Traffic 
Engineering 
Cell CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Traffic  Construction & beautification of medians  BBMP - 
Engineering - 
Traffic 
Engineering 
CellCPU  N/A Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Traffic  Installation & improvements to road marking 
& kerb signage  BBMP - 
Engineering - 
Traffic 
Engineering 
Cell CPU  N/A Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Traffic  Improvements to junctions and intersections  BBMP - 
Engineering - 
Traffic CPU  N/A Zone  Zone  N/A MC No No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-16 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Engineering 
Cell 
Traffic  Barricading to footpaths  BBMP - 
Engineering - 
Traffic 
Engineering 
Cell CPU  N/A Zone  Zone  N/A Zone  No No 
Traffic  Provision of road safety works & equipment  BBMP - 
Engineering - 
Traffic 
Engineering 
Cell CPU  MC Zone  Zone  N/A Zone  No No 
Birth & Death  Providing burial/cremation services  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes Yes 
Education  Construction & maintenance of Education 
buildings  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  No Yes 
Emergency 
Services  Undertaking flood management works  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  No Yes 
Garbage  Clearance of debris  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Garbage  Collection of debris clearance fee  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Public 
Conveniences  Construction & operating Dhobi Ghats  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  N/A Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  No No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-17 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Public 
Conveniences  Construction & improvements to BBMP 
Offices  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes No 
Public 
Conveniences  Construction & maintenance of community 
halls BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Public 
Conveniences  Clearing encroachment  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Public Health  Construction & maintenance of Hospital 
buildings  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  No No 
Public Health  Establishment & maintenance of drinking 
water filtration plant  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  N/A Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Public Spaces  Construction & maintenance of swimming 
pools  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes No 
Public Spaces  Construction & maintenance of sports, 
cultural, religious & recreational facilities  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Public Spaces  Collection of fees from swimming pools  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Roads  Construction & maintenance of Bridges, 
Culverts & Cause waysBBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes No 
Roads  Construction & maintenance of side walks  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-18 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Roads  Construction & maintenance of roadside 
drains BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Roads  Construction & maintenance of concrete walls  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes No 
Roads  Asphalting of roads  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Roads  Conducting road repair works  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Roads  Undertaking desilting of drains  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No Yes 
Roads  Resurfacing of bad roads  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Roads  Providing other road infrastructure  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Roads  Improvements to existing roads  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Roads  Redoing road cut portions  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Roads  Widening of existing roads  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  N/A Zone  Zone  N/A Zone  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-19 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Roads  Collection of road cutting & restoration 
charges  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Sanitation  Construction & maintenance of toilets BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  No Yes 
Sanitation  Construction of Under Ground Drainage  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  GBA GBA  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Service Fees  Collection of Pandal Fee  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Service Fees  Collection of duct services/Optic Fibre Cable 
charges  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Service Fees  Collection of charges from community halls BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Water  Establishment & maintenance of water 
treatment facility  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  N/A Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Water  Establishment & maintenance of water 
purification facility  BBMP - 
Engineering 
Public Works  CPU  N/A Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Public Spaces  Fencing of BBMP properties  BBMP - Estate  CPU  N/A Zone  Ward  N/A Zone  Yes No 
Public Spaces  Protection of Municipal property  BBMP - Estate  CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes Yes 
Statistics  Maintenance of up -to-date record of all 
buildings & sites  BBMP - Estate  CPU  N/A MC N/A MC MC Yes No 
Forestry Production of seedlings in nurseries  BBMP - Forest  State N/A Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Forestry Conducting tree survey, mapping & numbering  BBMP - Forest  State N/A Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-20 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Forestry Auctioning trees  BBMP - Forest  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Sustainability  Undertaking rain water harvesting & ground 
water rechargingBBMP - Forest  CPU  N/A Zone  Zone  N/A Zone  No No 
Sustainability  Removal of dead & decayed trees  BBMP - Forest  MC MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Sustainability  Identification of tree wardens/green police  BBMP - Forest  CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Sustainability  Transplanting of healthy trees  BBMP - Forest  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No Yes 
Sustainability  Development & maintenance of lakes & water 
bodies  BBMP - Forest  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes Yes 
Sustainability  Improvements to lakes & water bodies  BBMP - Forest  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes Yes 
Sustainability  Undertaking desilting of lakes  BBMP - Forest  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  No No 
Sustainability  Providing security service to lakes & water 
bodies  BBMP - Forest  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  No No 
Sustainability  Management of tree canopies  BBMP - Forest  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Emergency 
Services  Management of outbreak of diseases  BBMP - Health  CPU  N/A N/A N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Garbage  Disposal of Bio -medical waste  BBMP - Health  External  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Public Health  Implementation of campaigns & awareness 
programmes  BBMP - Health  State N/A MC N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Public Health Conducting training & workshops on public 
health for department  BBMP -Health State N/A Zone N/A Zone Zone Yes No
Public Health  Prevention of food adulteration  BBMP - Health  External  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Public Health  Implementation of mosquito control 
programme  BBMP - Health  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No Yes 
Public Health  Prevention of epidemics & communicable 
diseases  BBMP - Health  State MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Public Health  Establishment & maintenance of 
hospitals/Health Centres/Maternity 
Homes/Dispensaries/Clinical laboratories  BBMP - Health  External  MC MC Zone  Ward Zone  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-21 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Public Health  Construction & maintenance of Doctors' 
quarters  BBMP - Health  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  No No 
Public Health  Purchase & maintenance of equipment & 
vehicles  BBMP - Health  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes No 
Public Health  Screening & treatment of non communicable 
diseases  BBMP - Health  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Public Health Implementation of Family Welfare 
programmes  BBMP -Health State N/A Zone N/A Ward Zone No No
Public Health  Purchase of drugs & medicines  BBMP - Health  State MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Public Health  Implementation of supplementary nutrition 
programme  BBMP - Health  State MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Public Health  Implementation of AIDS programme  BBMP - Health  State MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Public Health  Conducting health check up for school children  BBMP - Health  State MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Public Health  Implementation of Pulse Polio Programme  BBMP - Health  State MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Public Health  Implementation of various State/Central 
Schemes  BBMP - Health  State N/A N/A N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Public Health  Distribution of discretionary medical relief 
grants  BBMP - Health  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Public Health  Treatment for dog/snakes/monkey/bee bites  BBMP - Health  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Public Health  Spraying of disinfectant/fumigation  BBMP - Health  External  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Public Health  Providing vaccinations  BBMP - Health  External  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Public Health  Regulating or abating offensive or dangerous 
trades or practices  BBMP - Health  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Registration  Licensing of hospitals/nursing homes  BBMP - Health  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Regulation  Regulation of slaughter houses & tanneries  BBMP - Health  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  No No 
Service Fees  Issue of Trade License to hotels & restaurants BBMP - Health  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Veterinary  Undertaking animal birth control measures  BBMP - Health  MC MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No Yes 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-22 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Veterinary  Collection of fees from Abattoir, Pet Dogs & 
other license fees  BBMP - Health  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Forestry Planting of trees  BBMP - 
Horticulture  CPU  MC Zone  Ward  N/A Zone  No Yes 
Forestry Distribution of saplings & inputs for indoor 
gardening to citizens  BBMP - 
Horticulture CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Forestry Conducting horticulture shows & programmes  BBMP - 
Horticulture  MC N/A Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  No No 
Information  Conducting awareness programmes & events  BBMP - 
Horticulture  MC N/A Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes Yes 
Livelihood 
Creation  Conducting horticulture related training  BBMP - 
Horticulture  MC N/A Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  No No 
Public Spaces  Development & maintenance of parks, 
nurseries, medians, boulevards & circles  BBMP - 
Horticulture CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Public Spaces Collection of fees from parks BBMP -
Horticulture  MC MC Zone N/A Ward Zone Yes No
Public Spaces  Lighting of parks  BBMP - 
Horticulture  MC MC Zone  Ward  Zone  Zone  Yes Yes 
Service Fees  Collection of rent from open air theatres  BBMP - 
HorticultureMC MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Service Fees  Collection of hire charges on potted plants & 
others  BBMP - 
Horticulture  MC MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Sustainability  Undertaking rain water harvesting & ground 
water recharging  BBMP - 
Horticulture CPU  N/A Zone  Zone  N/A Zone  Yes Yes 
Sustainability  Setting up of compost units in parks  BBMP - 
Horticulture  External  N/A Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  No No 
Water  Providing & operating bore wells, pump sets & 
pipelines  BBMP - 
Horticulture  CPU  MC Zone  Ward  Ward Zone  Yes No 
Infrastructure  Acquisition of land  BBMP - Land 
Acquisition  State N/A GBA  Zone  N/A GBA  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-23 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Urban Planning  Payment of compensation for land acquired  BBMP - Land 
Acquisition  State MC MC N/A Zone  State  Yes No 
Infrastructure  Construction & Maintenance of Markets  BBMP - 
Markets  CPU  MC MC Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Public Spaces  Collection of Gate Fee  BBMP - 
Markets  MC MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Service Fees  Renting/Leasing of markets  BBMP - 
Markets  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Service Fees  Collection of electricity & water charges on 
rented properties  BBMP - 
Markets MC MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Service Fees  Collection of Parking Fee  BBMP - 
Markets  MC MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Property  Providing Khatha Allotment services  BBMP - 
Revenue  CPU  MC N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Property  Providing Khatha Extracts  BBMP - 
Revenue  CPU  MC N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Property  Providing Khatha Transfer services  BBMP - 
Revenue  CPU  MC N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Property  Undertaking property & street numbering 
exercise  BBMP - 
Revenue  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Service Fees  Collection of hawking fee  BBMP - 
Revenue  MC MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Statistics  Computerisation of property records  BBMP - 
Revenue  MC N/A MC MC Ward Zone  Yes No 
Taxes  Collection of improvement charges  BBMP - 
Revenue  MC MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Taxes  Collection of service charges on Central 
Government buildings, tax exempted buildings  BBMP - 
Revenue  MC N/A Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Taxes  Collection of property tax  BBMP - 
Revenue  MC MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-24 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Taxes  Recovery of property tax  BBMP - 
Revenue  MC MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Taxes  Assessment of property tax  BBMP - 
Revenue  MC MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Taxes  Administration of cesses on behalf of 
Government  BBMP - 
Revenue  State MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Birth & Death Registration of child name BBMP -
Statistics  CPU MC Zone N/A Ward Zone Yes No
Statistics  Registration of births  BBMP - 
Statistics  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Statistics  Registration of deaths  BBMP - 
Statistics  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Garbage  Hiring of Solid Waste Management vehicles  BBMP - SWM  CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Garbage  Acquiring land for Solid Waste Management  BBMP - SWM  CPU  N/A GBA  GBA  GBA  GBA  No No 
Garbage  Development of new sanitary landfills  BBMP - SWM  CPU  N/A GBA  GBA  N/A GBA  No No 
Garbage  Establishment & maintenance of primary solid 
waste collection centres  BBMP - SWM  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Garbage  Improvements to existing solid waste landfills  BBMP - SWM  CPU  N/A GBA  GBA  N/A GBA  Yes No 
Garbage  Establishment of solid waste transfer stations  BBMP - SWM  CPU  N/A MC MC N/A MC Yes No 
Garbage  Maintenance of land fills/waste dumping yards  BBMP - SWM  CPU  N/A Zone  N/A MC MC No No 
Garbage  Purchase & maintenance of BBMP garbage 
vehicles  BBMP - SWM  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Garbage  Providing security service to Land fills BBMP - SWM  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  No No 
Garbage  Transportation of solid waste to segregation 
points  BBMP - SWM  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Garbage  Collection of Solid Waste  BBMP - SWM  MC MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Garbage  Identification of sites for land fills  BBMP - SWM  CPU  N/A N/A MC N/A MC No No 
Garbage  Collection of tipping fee  BBMP - SWM  MC MC N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-25 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Garbage  Sale of solid waste  BBMP - SWM  MC MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Garbage  Scavenging streets  BBMP - SWM  MC MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Garbage  Setting up & operating Dry Waste Collection 
Centre  BBMP - SWM  CPU  MC MC Ward  Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Garbage  Purchase of push carts & bins  BBMP - SWM  CPU  N/A Zone  Ward  N/A Zone  Yes No 
Garbage  Removal of unclaimed corpses/carcasses  BBMP - SWM  External  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Information  Conducting awareness campaigns & publicity 
on Solid Waste Management  BBMP - SWM  MC N/A Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Livelihood 
Creation  Implementation of livelihood programmes for 
waste pickers  BBMP - SWM  CPU  N/A MC N/A Zone  Zone  No No 
Public Health  Development of area surrounding landfill sites  BBMP - SWM  CPU  N/A MC MC MC MC No No 
Taxes  Collection of Solid Waste Management Cess  BBMP - SWM  MC MC MC N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Property  Approval of Building Plan - Small Units  BBMP - Town 
Planning  CPU  MC N/A N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Property  Approval of Building Plan - Medium Units  BBMP - Town 
Planning  CPU  MC N/A N/A Zone  MC Yes No 
Property  Approval of Building Plan - Large Units  BBMP - Town 
Planning  CPU  MC N/A N/A MC GBA  Yes No 
Property  Regularisation  of building deviations  BBMP - Town 
Planning  CPU  MC MC N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Property  Approval of Apartment Plan  BBMP - Town 
Planning  MC MC Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Property  Approval of Civic Amenities Site Plan  BBMP - Town 
Planning  MC MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Property  Licensing for building BBMP - Town 
Planning  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Property  Issue of commencement & occupancy 
certificate  BBMP - Town 
Planning  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A MC MC Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-26 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Property  Issue of Development Rights Certificate  BBMP - Town 
Planning  MC MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Property  Authentication & correction of entries in map 
on application by citizens  BBMP - Town 
Planning  N/A GBA MC Zone  N/A Zone  Yes No 
Registration  Registration of Architects, Engineers & 
Supervisors  BBMP - Town 
Planning  MC MC Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Regulation  Action against building violations  BBMP - Town 
Planning  MC MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Regulation  Monitoring Transfer of Development Rights  BBMP - Town 
PlanningMC N/A N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Roads  Collection of road cutting & restoration 
charges  BBMP - Town 
Planning  MC MC N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Service Fees  Collection of ground rent  BBMP - Town 
Planning  MC MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Statistics  Digitisation of building plans  BBMP - Town 
Planning  CPU  N/A MC N/A MC MC Yes No 
Taxes  Collection of betterment charges  BBMP - Town 
Planning  MC MC MC N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Assisstance in Preparation of Master Plan  BBMP - Town 
Planning  CPU  N/A MC N/A N/A GBA  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Asisstance in Revision of Master Plan  BBMP - Town 
PlanningCPU  N/A MC N/A N/A GBA  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Inputs for Allocation of Floor Area Ratio  BBMP - Town 
Planning  CPU  N/A N/A N/A N/A Zone  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Undertaking studies & surveys  BBMP - Town 
Planning  External  N/A GBA  GBA  N/A GBA  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Formulation of Building Bye Laws  BBMP - Town 
Planning  CPU  N/A N/A N/A N/A GBA  No No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-27 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Urban Planning  Furnishing technical opinion of Town Planning  BBMP - Town 
Planning  CPU  MC N/A N/A MC MC Yes No 
Livelihood 
Creation  Conducting skill development & training  BBMP - 
Welfare  CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  No No 
Livelihood 
Creation  Revival or promotion of cottage industries  BBMP - 
Welfare  CPU  N/A MC N/A Zone  Zone  No No 
Public Health  Providing hygiene kits for girl students  BBMP - 
Welfare  CPU  MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Statistics  Undertaking survey of Safai Karma Charis  BBMP - 
Welfare  CPU  N/A MC N/A MC MC Yes No 
Statistics  Undertaking survey of physically challenged  BBMP - 
Welfare  CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Welfare  Providing financial support to low income 
earning group  BBMP - 
Welfare  MC MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Welfare  Undertaking slum improvement works  BBMP - 
Welfare  CPU  N/A MC Zone  Zone  MC No Yes 
Welfare  Upgradation  of slums  BBMP - 
Welfare  State N/A GBA  Zone  N/A Zone  No No 
Welfare  Extending contributions/grants to 
community/individuals  BBMP - 
Welfare  MC MC Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes Yes 
Welfare  Construction of houses  BBMP - 
Welfare  CPU  N/A Zone  Zone  N/A Zone  Yes No 
Welfare  Construction & maintenance of night shelters  BBMP - 
Welfare  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes No 
Welfare  Providing financial assistance for 
physically/mentally challengedBBMP - 
Welfare  MC N/A Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Welfare  Supply of equipment for physically challenged  BBMP - 
Welfare  CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Welfare  Establishment & operating Anganwadis  BBMP - 
WelfareCPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-28 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Welfare  Providing financial assistance to SC/ST & 
weaker section for Learning & Development  BBMP - 
Welfare  MC N/A Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Welfare  Providing financial assistance to children of 
Pourakarmika’s Gang men & Malies of BBMP  BBMP - 
Welfare  MC N/A Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Welfare  Distribution of bicycles to SC/ST, backward  
class & Economically Weaker Section  BBMP - 
Welfare  CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Welfare  Construction & maintenance of new hostels 
for SC/ST, backward class & Economically 
Weaker Section  BBMP - 
Welfare  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes No 
Welfare  Conducting career guidance workshops for 
SC/ST, backward class & Economically Weaker 
Section  BBMP - 
Welfare  CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Welfare  Providing financial aid to the person suffering 
from severe chronic diseases  BBMP - 
Welfare  MC N/A Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Welfare Medical aid/services to victims of riots, natural 
calamities  BBMP -
Welfare  MC N/A Zone N/A Ward Zone No No
Welfare  Establishment & operating Help centres for 
destitute, abused & oppressed women  BBMP - 
Welfare  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes No 
Welfare  Establishment & operating day care centres 
for senior citizens  BBMP - 
Welfare  CPU  MC Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes No 
Welfare  Providing mid day meals/medical help to 
senior citizens  BBMP - 
Welfare  MC MC Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Welfare  Implementation of economic support 
programme for unemployed youth  BBMP - 
Welfare  MC N/A Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Welfare  Providing economic Support under Micro 
Credit Scheme  BBMP - 
Welfare  MC N/A MC N/A MC MC Yes No 
Heritage  Conservation of the cultural heritage buildings  BDA  State N/A GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  No No 
Heritage  Preventing uncontrolled development of the 
heritage area & commercial exploitation of the 
area  BDA  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-29 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Heritage  Protection of public property within the 
heritage area  BDA  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A Zone  GBA  No No 
Housing  Construction of houses for Economically 
Weaker Sections, Low Income Group, Middle 
Income Group, High Income Group BDA  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Housing  Allotment of sites, houses & other properties  BDA  CPU  GBA GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Infrastructure  Construction & maintenance of commercial 
complexes  BDA  CPU  N/A GBA  Zone  N/A Zone  No No 
Infrastructure  Development of major infrastructure facilities  BDA  CPU  N/A GBA  Zone  N/A GBA  No No 
Layouts  Approval of development plans for group 
housing & layouts  BDA  CPU  GBA GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Layouts  Implementation of schemes to provide 
residential sites, commercial sites, industrial 
sites, civic amenity sites, parks & playgrounds.  BDA  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  No No 
Property  Issue of commencement & occupancy 
certificateBDA  CPU  GBA GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Property  Approval of Building Plan - Small Units  BDA  CPU  GBA N/A N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Property  Approval of Building Plan - Medium Units  BDA  CPU  GBA N/A N/A MC MC Yes No 
Property Approval of Building Plan -Large Units BDA CPU GBA N/A N/A GBA GBA Yes No
Property  Regularisation of building deviations  BDA  CPU  GBA GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Property  Authentication & correction of entries in map 
on application by citizens  BDA  N/A GBA GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Public 
Conveniences  Preservation & improving existing recreational 
facilities & other amenities  BDA  CPU  N/A GBA  Zone  N/A Zone  No No 
Public Spaces  Providing for parks, playgrounds & open 
spaces or any other civic amenities  BDA  CPU  N/A GBA  Zone  N/A Zone  Yes No 
Roads  Widening of existing roads or formation of a 
new roads  BDA  CPU  N/A GBA  Zone  N/A Zone  No No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-30 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Urban Planning  Preparation of Master/Development Plan  BDA  External  N/A GBA  GBA  N/A GBA  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Preparation of scheme plans BDA  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A N/A GBA  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Monitoring land use for planned growth  BDA  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A Zone  GBA  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Fixing of market value for acquisition of land  BDA  CPU  N/A N/A N/A N/A GBA  No No 
Urban Planning  Payment of compensation for land acquired  BDA  State GBA GBA  N/A Zone  State  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Conversion of agricultural land for non 
agricultural purpose  BDA  CPU  GBA GBA  N/A Zone  GBA  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Allocation of Floor Area Ratio  BDA  CPU  GBA N/A N/A N/A GBA  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Declaration of local planning areas, their 
amalgamation, sub -division, inclusion of any 
area in a local planning area  BDA  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  No No 
Urban Planning  Acquisition of land  BDA  CPU  N/A GBA  Zone  N/A GBA  No No 
Welfare  Provision of sites & catering to the housing 
needs of the under privileged  BDA  CPU  GBA GBA  Ward  N/A Zone  No No 
Complaints 
Handling  Resolving billing complaints  BESCOM  CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Complaints 
Handling  Establishment & operating Public Grievance 
Redressal cell  BESCOM  CPU  GBA Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes No 
Complaints 
Handling  Setting up & operating helpline  BESCOM  CPU  GBA GBA  GBA  Zone  Zone  No No 
Emergency  
Services  Undertaking accident prevention & control 
measures  BESCOM  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Energy  Distribution & supply of electricity to Main 
Lines  BESCOM  CPU  GBA GBA  GBA  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Energy  Distribution & supply of electricity to Tertiary 
Lines  BESCOM  CPU  GBA Zone  GBA  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Energy  Distribution & supply of electricity to Sub Lines  BESCOM  CPU  GBA Zone  GBA  Ward Zone  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-31 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Energy  Establishment & maintenance of electricity 
supply & distribution network in main lines  BESCOM  CPU  GBA GBA  GBA  GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Energy  Establishment & maintenance of electricity 
supply & distribution network in tertiary lines  BESCOM  CPU  GBA GBA  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Energy  Establishment & maintenance of electricity 
supply & distribution network in Sub Lines  BESCOM  CPU  GBA Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes No 
Energy  Provision of new connections to domestic, 
commercial, industries, agriculture users  BESCOM  CPU  GBA Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes No 
Energy  Providing temporary connections  BESCOM  CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Energy  Billing for power used  BESCOM  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Energy  Installation of meters  BESCOM  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Energy  Recalibration of meters  BESCOM  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Energy  Setting & revision of  tariff  BESCOM  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A GBA  GBA  No No 
Energy  Surrendering power connections  BESCOM  CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Energy  Attending to failure of power supply  BESCOM  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Energy  Maintenance of overhead power lines  BESCOM  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Energy  Dousing of fire due to short circuit   BESCOM  CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Energy  Replacement of burnt out meter  BESCOM  CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Energy  Repairing & replacement of lamps & street 
light fittings  BESCOM  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Energy  Resolving voltage complaints  BESCOM  CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Energy  Planning capacity based on demand & supply  BESCOM  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Energy  Implementation of power related schemes  BESCOM  CPU  GBA GBA  N/A GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Energy  Sanctioning loads BESCOM  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Energy  Updation of consumer data  BESCOM  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Energy  Refund of security deposit  BESCOM  CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-32 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Energy  Utility shifting  BESCOM  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  No No 
Energy  Purchase of power  BESCOM  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A GBA  GBA  No No 
Information  Intimation of power cuts  BESCOM  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Information  Organising  awareness campaigns  BESCOM  CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Infrastructure  Improving the supply & distribution network 
for Main LinesBESCOM  State N/A GBA  GBA  N/A GBA  Yes No 
Infrastructure  Improving the supply & distribution network 
for Tertiary Lines  BESCOM  State N/A GBA  Zone  N/A Zone  Yes No 
Infrastructure  Improving the supply & distribution network 
for Sub Lines  BESCOM  State N/A Zone  Ward  N/A Zone  Yes No 
Registration  Making changes to name of connection  BESCOM  CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Regulation  Disconnection of unauthorized connection  BESCOM  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Regulation  Disconnection & reconnection for non -
payment of dues  BESCOM  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Regulation  Prevention of theft of power  BESCOM  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Regulation  Initiating criminal actions in cases of power 
theftBESCOM  CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Statistics  Maintenance of consumers accounts  BESCOM  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Sustainability Promoting use of alternate power BESCOM CPU GBA Zone N/A Ward Zone Yes No
Energy  Providing lighting for public streets, places & 
buildings  BIAAPA  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Fitness  Preservation & improving existing recreational 
facilities & other amenities  BIAAPA  CPU  N/A GBA  Zone  N/A Zone  No No 
Garbage  Cleansing public streets, sewer & places  BIAAPA  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Heritage  Conservation of cultural heritage buildings  BIAAPA  State N/A GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  No No 
Heritage  Preventing uncontrolled development of the 
heritage area & commercial exploitation of the BIAAPA  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-33 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
area  
Heritage  Protection of public property within the 
heritage area  BIAAPA  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A Zone  GBA  No No 
Infrastructure  Construction & maintaining public amenities  BIAAPA  CPU  GBA Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes No 
Infrastructure  Improving public amenities  BIAAPA  CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Layouts  Implementation of schemes to provide 
residential sites, commercial sites, industrial 
sites, civic amenity sites, parks & playgrounds.  BIAAPA  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Property  Providing technical opinion for land 
conversion  BIAAPA  CPU  GBA N/A N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Property  Approval of Building Plan  BIAAPA  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Property  Collection of plan approval fee  BIAAPA  CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Property  Conversion of agricultural land for non 
agricultural purpose  BIAAPA  CPU  GBA GBA  N/A Zone  GBA  Yes No 
Property  Regularisation  of building deviations  BIAAPA  CPU  GBA GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Property  Authentication & correction of entries in map 
on application by citizens  BIAAPA  N/A GBA GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Public Health  Securing or removing dangerous buildings or 
places & reclaiming unhealthy localities  BIAAPA  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Public Spaces  Watering public streets & places  BIAAPA  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Public Spaces  Removing obstructions & projections in public 
spaces  BIAAPA  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Public Spaces  Providing for parks, playgrounds & open 
spaces or any other civic amenities  BIAAPA  CPU  N/A GBA  Zone  N/A Zone  Yes No 
Regulation  Regulating or abating offensive or dangerous 
trades or practices  BIAAPA  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Roads  Widening of existing roads or formation of BIAAPA  CPU  N/A GBA  Zone  N/A Zone  No No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-34 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
new roads  
Statistics  Naming streets & numbering houses  BIAAPA  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Sustainability  Setting up of rain water harvesting systems  BIAAPA  External  N/A Zone  Zone  N/A Zone  No No 
Taxes  Collection of betterment fees  BIAAPA  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Undertaking zoning exercise  BIAAPA  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A Zone  GBA  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Monitoring land use for planned growth  BIAAPA  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A Zone  GBA  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Mapping of land use  BIAAPA  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Undertaking survey of Bangalore Metropolitan 
RegionBIAAPA  External  N/A GBA  N/A GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Formulation of schemes for Bangalore 
Metropolitan Region  BIAAPA  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Fixing of market value for acquisition of land  BIAAPA  CPU  N/A N/A N/A N/A GBA  No No 
Urban Planning  Payment of compensation for land acquired  BIAAPA  State GBA GBA  N/A Zone  State  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Allocation of Floor Area Ratio  BIAAPA  CPU  GBA N/A N/A N/A GBA  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Declaration of Local Planning Areas, their 
amalgamation, Sub -Division, inclusion of any 
area in a Local Planning AreaBIAAPA  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  No No 
Complaints 
Handling  Setting up & operating helpline  BMRCL  CPU  GBA GBA  GBA  GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Emergency 
Services  Setting up of accident response systems  BMRCL  CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Public 
Transport  Establishment & operating new routes  BMRCL  CPU  N/A GBA  GBA  Zone  GBA  Yes No 
Public 
Transport  Establishment of station facilities  BMRCL  CPU  N/A Zone  Zone  N/A Zone  Yes No 
Public 
Transport  Issue of tickets & passes  BMRCL  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Public Advertising on trains & in stations  BMRCL  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-35 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Transport  
Public 
TransportOperating stations  BMRCL  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Public 
Transport  Running of trains  BMRCL  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Public 
Transport  Revision of tariffs  BMRCL  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A GBA  GBA  No No 
Public 
Transport  Planning for capacity & enhancement of 
capacity  BMRCL  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Public 
Transport  Conducting awareness campaigns & events  BMRCL  CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Public 
Transport  Establishment & operating Public Grievance 
Redressal cell  BMRCL  CPU  GBA Zone  GBA  Ward Zone  Yes No 
Sustainability  Compliance to Safety, Health & Environment 
standards  BMRCL  External  N/A GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Preparation of Master Plan/Development Plan  BMRCL  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A N/A GBA  Yes No 
Fitness  Preservation & improving existing recreational 
facilities & other amenities  BMRDA CPU  N/A GBA  Zone  N/A Zone  No No 
Heritage  Conservation of cultural heritage  buildings  BMRDA State N/A GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  No No 
Heritage  Preventing uncontrolled development of the 
heritage area & commercial exploitation of the 
area  BMRDA CPU  N/A GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Heritage  Protection of public property within the 
heritage area  BMRDA CPU  N/A GBA  N/A Zone  GBA  No No 
Layouts  Approval of layouts & building plan  BMRDA CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Zone  GBA  Yes No 
Property  Regularisation of building deviations  BMRDA CPU  GBA GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Property  Authentication & correction of entries in map 
on application by citizens  BMRDA N/A GBA GBA  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-36 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Public Spaces  Providing for parks, playgrounds & open 
spaces or any other civic amenities  BMRDA CPU  N/A GBA  Zone  N/A Zone  Yes No 
Roads  Widening of existing roads or formation of 
new roads  BMRDA CPU  N/A GBA  Zone  N/A Zone  No No 
Sustainability  Rejuvenation of tanks within Bangalore 
Metropolitan Region  BMRDA CPU  GBA GBA  Zone  Zone  Zone  No No 
Traffic  Preparation of traffic management plans  BMRDA CPU  N/A GBA  N/A Zone  GBA  Yes No 
Traffic  Planning of mass traffic system  BMRDA CPU  N/A GBA  N/A GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Formulation of beautification schemes for 
preserving & enhancing urban 
aesthetic  qualities  BMRDA CPU  N/A GBA  N/A N/A GBA  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Implementation of beautification schemes for 
preserving & enhancing urban 
aesthetic  qualities  BMRDA CPU  N/A GBA  Zone  N/A Zone  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Acquisition of land  BMRDA CPU  N/A GBA  Zone  N/A GBA  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Issue of No Objection Certificate  for 
conversion of agriculture land  BMRDA CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Preparation of Master Plan/Structure Plan  BMRDA CPU  N/A GBA  GBA  N/A Zone  Yes No 
Urban Planning Extending technical assistance/opinion to 
various Government Departments  BMRDA CPU GBA N/A N/A GBA GBA Yes No
Urban Planning  Undertaking zoning exercise  BMRDA CPU  N/A GBA  N/A Zone  GBA  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Monitoring land use for planned growth  BMRDA CPU  N/A GBA  N/A Zone  GBA  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Fixing market value for acquisition of land BMRDA CPU  N/A N/A N/A N/A GBA  No No 
Urban Planning  Payment of compensation for land acquired  BMRDA State GBA GBA  N/A Zone  State  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Conversion of agricultural land for non 
agricultural purpose  BMRDA CPU  GBA GBA  N/A Zone  GBA  Yes No 
Urban Planning Allocation of Floor Area Ratio BMRDA CPU GBA N/A N/A N/A GBA Yes No
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-37 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Urban Planning  Declaration of Local Planning Areas, their 
amalgamation, Sub -Division, inclusion of any 
area in a Local Planning Area  BMRDA CPU  N/A GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  No No 
Welfare  Formulation of Rehabilitation/Re -settlement 
Schemes  BMRDA State GBA GBA  N/A N/A GBA  Yes No 
Complaints 
Handling  Setting up & operating helpline  BMTC  CPU  GBA Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Complaints 
Handling  Establishment &  operation of Public Grievance 
Redressal cell  BMTC  CPU  GBA GBA  GBA  Ward GBA  Yes No 
Emergency 
ServicesSetting up of accident response systems  BMTC  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  No No 
Information  Conducting awareness campaigns & events  BMTC  CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes Yes 
Public 
Conveniences  Extending insurance to commuters  BMTC  CPU  GBA GBA  N/A GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Public 
Transport  Purchase of buses  BMTC  CPU  N/A Zone  Zone  N/A Zone  Yes No 
Public 
Transport  Maintenance of buses  BMTC  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Public 
Transport  Cleaning of buses BMTC  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Public 
Transport  Installation of bus shelters BMTC  CPU  N/A GBA  Zone  N/A Zone  Yes Yes 
Public 
Transport  Planning route network  BMTC  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A N/A GBA  Yes No 
Public 
Transport  Implementation of Intelligent Transport 
Systems  BMTC  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Public 
Transport  Modernising the fleet BMTC CPU N/A Zone Zone N/A Zone Yes No
Public 
Transport  Management of breakdowns  BMTC  External  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  No No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-38 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Public 
Transport  Undertaking fare structuring & revision 
exercise  BMTC  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A N/A N/A No No 
Public 
Transport  Undertaking research & studies in urban 
transport  BMTC  External  N/A GBA  N/A GBA  GBA  No No 
Public 
Transport  Establishment & operating of depots BMTC  CPU  GBA Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Public 
Transport  Regulating & managing fleet traffic BMTC CPU GBA Zone N/A Zone Zone Yes No
Public 
Transport  Redesigning & scheduling of routes  BMTC  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A N/A GBA  Yes No 
Public 
Transport  Providing public utilities for commuters at bus 
terminals  BMTC  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  No No 
Public 
Transport  Providing safety & security at the bus stands  BMTC  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  No No 
Public 
Transport  Establishment & operating bus terminals  BMTC  CPU  GBA Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes No 
Public 
Transport  Operating chartered services for other 
agencies  BMTC  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Zone  GBA  Yes No 
Regulation  Regulating advertisements at BMTC main bus 
stops & buses  BMTC  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Regulation  Conducting surprise checks for ticketless 
travels  BMTC  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Service Fees  Operating buses on contract  BMTC  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Statistics  Maintenance of database of fleet  BMTC  CPU  N/A GBA  Zone  N/A Zone  Yes No 
Sustainability  Compliance to Safety, Health & Environment 
standards  BMTC  External  GBA Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Sustainability  Withdrawal of old buses from service  BMTC  External  GBA Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Preparation of city development plans  BMTC  CPU  N/A N/A GBA  N/A GBA  Yes No 
Welfare  Issue of tickets & passes  BMTC  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-39 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Welfare  Extending travel concession to the weaker 
sections of the society  BMTC  CPU  GBA GBA  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Complaints 
Handling  Resolving billing complaints  BWSSB  CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Complaints 
Handling  Establishment & operation of Public Grievance 
Redressal cell  BWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes No 
Complaints 
Handling  Setting up & operating helpline  BWSSB  CPU  GBA GBA  GBA  GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Emergency 
Services  Undertaking accident prevention & control 
measures  BWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Emergency 
Services  Undertaking flood management works  BWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Information  Conducting awareness campaigns & events  BWSSB  CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Information  Intimation of water supply timings & 
disruptions  BWSSB  CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Infrastructure  Planning capacity based on demand & supply  BWSSB  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A N/A GBA  Yes No 
Property  Granting permission for additional connection  BWSSB  CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Property  Sanctioning of bore wells  BWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Registration  Making changes to consumer data  BWSSB  CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Regulation  Disconnection & reconnection of illegal & 
unauthorised connection  BWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Regulation  Detection of unaccounted water  BWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Regulation  Action for prevention of theft of water  BWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No Yes 
Regulation  Initiating criminal actions in cases of theft of 
water  BWSSB  CPU  GBA GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  No No 
Regulation  Regulation of unauthorised bore wells  BWSSB  CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Regulation  Regulation of private water tankers  BWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-40 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Sanitation  Undertaking sewage treatment works  BWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Sanitation  Providing domestic, industrial & commercial 
sewerage connectionBWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Sanitation  Establishment & maintenance of sewerage 
network  BWSSB  CPU  GBA GBA  GBA  Zone  GBA  Yes Yes 
Sanitation  Improving sewerage network  BWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Sanitation  Setting up & maintenance of Sewage 
Treatment Plant  BWSSB  CPU  GBA GBA  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes No 
Statistics  Maintenance of consumers accounts  BWSSB  CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Sustainability  Setting up rain water harvesting & ground 
water recharging systems  BWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes Yes 
Sustainability  Promoting use of alternate sources of water  BWSSB  CPU  GBA GBA  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Water  Providing domestic, industrial & commercial 
water connection  BWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Water  Providing free connections to urban poor  BWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Water  Supply of water through tankers  BWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Water  Billing & collection for water supply  BWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Water  Sanctioning water supply  BWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Water  Establishment & maintenance of water supply 
network for Main Lines  BWSSB  CPU  GBA GBA  GBA  GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Water  Establishment & maintenance of water supply 
network for Tertiary Lines  BWSSB  CPU  GBA GBA  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Water  Establishment & maintenance of water supply 
network for Households  BWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Water  Construction & maintenance of tanks & 
reservoirs  BWSSB  State GBA GBA  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes No 
Water  Setting up & operating water testing 
laboratories  BWSSB  External  GBA GBA  Zone  Ward GBA  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-41 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Water  Improving water supply network  BWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Water  Conversion from non domestic to domestic 
connectionBWSSB  CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Water  Providing Non -domestic connection for 
construction purposes  BWSSB  CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Water  Pumping of water  BWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Water  Installation of meters  BWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Water  Recalibration of meters  BWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Water  Setting & revision of tariff  BWSSB  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A GBA  GBA  No No 
Water  Surrendering of water connections  BWSSB  CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Water  Attending to failure of water supply  BWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Water  Implementation of water supply & sanitation 
related schemes  BWSSB  CPU  GBA GBA  N/A GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Water  Setting up & maintenance of Water Treatment 
Plant  BWSSB  CPU  GBA GBA  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes No 
Water  Undertaking water & sanitation maintenance 
works  BWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Water Ensuring regular water supply in Main lines BWSSB CPU GBA GBA N/A Zone GBA Yes No
Water  Ensuring regular water supply in Tertiary Lines 
Feeder  BWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Zone  GBA  Yes No 
Water  Ensuring regular water supply for Households BWSSB  CPU  GBA Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Water  Management of water during crisis  BWSSB  CPU  GBA GBA  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Emergency 
Services  Setting up of road safety & trauma response 
system  DULT  CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Infrastructure  Establishment of Intelligent Transport System  DULT  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Public 
Transport  Implementation of Sub -Urban Rail System  DULT  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A GBA  GBA  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-42 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Roads  Improvements to non motorised transport 
infrastructure  DULT  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A GBA  GBA  Yes Yes 
Sustainability  Promoting the use of cleaner technologies  DULT  CPU  GBA GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Taxes  Levying of cess on motor vehicle tax  DULT  CPU  N/A GBA  GBA  GBA  GBA  GBA  No 
Taxes  Levying of cess on property tax  DULT  CPU  GBA GBA  N/A GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Traffic  Conducting studies & surveys on traffic 
management  DULT  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A N/A GBA  Yes No 
Traffic  Preparation of guidelines & tool kits for traffic 
management  DULT  External  N/A GBA  N/A N/A GBA  Yes No 
Complaints 
Handling  Setting up & operating helpline Fire 
department  CPU GBA GBA GBA GBA GBA Yes No
Emergency 
Services  Attending to fire emergencies in minimum 
response time  Fire 
department  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Emergency 
Services  Establishment/improvements & operation of 
fire stations, vehicles & equipment  Fire 
department  CPU  GBA GBA  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Emergency 
Services  Setting up of disaster rescue systems  Fire 
department  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Emergency 
Services  Providing standby fire fighting arrangements 
at large public amusement areas, gatherings & 
important public meetings  Fire 
department  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Emergency 
Services  Establishment of Emergency Para Medical 
Services (EPMS) in all fire Stations  Fire 
department  External  N/A GBA  Zone  N/A Zone  Yes No 
Emergency 
Services  Provision of Search & Rescue Services (SAR)  Fire 
department  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Emergency 
Services  Adopting a static as well as mobile command 
& control systems  Fire 
department  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Information  Conducting awareness campaigns & events  Fire 
departmentCPU  N/A Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Property  Issue of No Objection & Clearance Certificates  Fire CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-43 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
department  
Taxes  Levying Fire Tax  Fire 
departmentState N/A GBA  N/A GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Forestry Production & distribution of quality planting 
materials of various Horticultural plants  Horticulture  State GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Forestry Development & maintenance of farms & 
nurseries  Horticulture  State GBA Zone  Zone  N/A Zone  Yes No 
Information  Dissemination of advanced horticultural 
technology  Horticulture  State GBA Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Infrastructure  Setting up & maintenance of cold storage units  Horticulture  State N/A GBA  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Infrastructure  Establishment of Tissue Culture Labs  Horticulture  State N/A GBA  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Infrastructure  Establishment of packaging units market 
facilities & linkages  Horticulture  CPU  GBA Zone  Zone  N/A Zone  No No 
Infrastructure  Development of departmental laboratories  Horticulture  State GBA Zone  Zone  N/A Zone  Yes No 
Infrastructure Development & maintenance of storage 
facilities  Horticulture CPU GBA Zone Zone Zone Zone Yes No
Public Spaces  Maintenance of public parks  Horticulture  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No Yes 
Registration  Approval for Organic Certification Agency  Horticulture  State GBA N/A N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Service Fees  Cultivation & Sale of fruits & vegetables  Horticulture  State GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Service Fees  Cultivation & Sale of medicinal plants  Horticulture  State GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Service Fees  Transport of private horticulture produce  Horticulture  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Information  Providing social awareness & community 
development with the help of CBO/ NGO’s  Karnataka Slum 
Development 
Board  CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No Yes 
Public Health  Removal of  un-hygienic & insanitary  
conditions prevailing in the slums  Karnataka Slum 
Development 
Board  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-44 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Regulation  Demolition of buildings unlawfully constructed  Karnataka Slum 
Development 
Board  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Slums  Undertaking works on environmental 
improvement, clearance & redevelopment of 
slums  Karnataka Slum 
Development 
Board  State N/A Zone  Zone  N/A Zone  No No 
Slums  Providing housing & infrastructural facilities to 
slum dwellers  Karnataka Slum 
Development 
Board  CPU  GBA Zone  Zone  N/A Zone  No No 
Statistics  Registration of building in slum areas  Karnataka Slum 
Development 
Board  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Conducting Socio - economic survey of slums  Karnataka Slum 
Development 
Board  State N/A GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Urban Planning  Identify & declare slum areas  Karnataka Slum 
Development 
Board  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A N/A N/A Yes No 
Welfare  Providing basic amenities to slum dwellers  Karnataka Slum 
Development 
Board  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Housing  Acquisition of land for housing projects  KHB  CPU  N/A GBA  GBA  N/A GBA  Yes No 
Housing  Distribution or redistribution of sites & houses  KHB  CPU  GBA GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Housing  Undertaking housing schemes & land 
development schemes  KHB  State N/A GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Taxes  Levying Betterment Charges  KHB  CPU  N/A GBA  N/A N/A GBA  Yes No 
Housing  Construction of houses for employees of 
industrial estates  KIADB  CPU  N/A GBA  Zone  N/A Zone  No No 
Infrastructure  Acquisition of land  KIADB  CPU  N/A GBA  Zone  N/A GBA  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-45 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Infrastructure  Development, maintenance & management of 
industrial areas, estates  KIADB  CPU  N/A GBA  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Property  Allotment of industrial land, buildings  KIADB  CPU  GBA Zone  GBA  N/A Zone  Yes No 
Service Fees  Collection of lease on industrial Land, Buildings  KIADB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Energy  Shifting of electrical lines  KPTCL  CPU  GBA GBA  N/A GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Energy  Transmission from generating stations to sub -
stations  KPTCL  CPU  GBA GBA  N/A GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Infrastructure  Setting up & maintenance of transmission 
network & sub- stations  KPTCL  External  GBA GBA  GBA  GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Infrastructure  Providing technical & engineering solutions to 
other departments  KPWD  State GBA N/A N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Regulation  Issue of Fitness  Certificates KPWD  State GBA GBA  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Regulation  Preparation of schedule of rates  KPWD  State N/A GBA  N/A N/A GBA  Yes No 
Regulation  Setting standards for uninterrupted flow of 
traffic with better safety features  KPWD  CPU  N/A N/A N/A N/A GBA  No No 
Regulation  Conducting quality testing programmes  KPWD  State GBA N/A N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Roads  Permission for cutting roads  KPWD  State GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Complaints 
Handling  Establishment & operation of Public Grievance 
Redressal  cell KSPCB  CPU  GBA GBA  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes No 
Complaints 
Handling  Setting up & operating helpline  KSPCB  CPU  GBA GBA  GBA  GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Information  Implementation of environment awareness 
programmes  KSPCB  CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Information  Advising on environment & pollution matters  KSPCB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Infrastructure  Establishment & operation of labs  KSPCB  External  GBA Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Infrastructure  Purchase of pollution control equipment  KSPCB  External  N/A Zone  Zone  N/A Zone  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-46 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Recognition & 
Awards  Institution of awards & recognition for 
environment protection  KSPCB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Regulation  Providing consent for operation  KSPCB  External  GBA N/A N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Regulation  Providing consent for establishment & consent 
for expansion  KSPCB  External  GBA N/A N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Regulation  Renewal of consent for operation  KSPCB  External  GBA N/A N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Regulation  Defining & monitoring  standards  KSPCB  CPU  N/A N/A N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Regulation  Responding to pollution incidents  KSPCB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Regulation  Conducting inspections  KSPCB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Statistics  Undertaking studies & surveys  KSPCB  CPU  N/A GBA  GBA  N/A GBA  No No 
Sustainability  Conducting water/air analysis  KSPCB  External  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Sustainability  Collection of consent for Operation, consent 
for Establishment & Analysis fees  KSPCB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Sustainability  Collection of water cess  KSPCB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Sustainability  Collection & refund of guarantee money  KSPCB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Sustainability  Collection of lab fees, Hazardous Waste 
Management fee & other fees  KSPCB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Sustainability  Setting up & operating Common Effluent 
Treatment PlantKSPCB  External  GBA Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Sustainability  Implementation of Hazardous Waste 
Management, e- waste management & other 
Rules  KSPCB  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Information  Conducting monthly/periodic public meetings  Bangalore 
PoliceCPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Infrastructure  Setting up & operating Janasnehi points  Bangalore 
Police  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Safety & 
Security  Receipt of complaints  Bangalore 
Police  State GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-47 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Safety & 
Security  Registration of First Information Report  Bangalore 
Police  State GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Safety & 
Security  IN/OUT transfer of First Information Report  Bangalore 
Police  State GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Safety & 
Security  Registration of Non Cognizable Report  Bangalore 
Police  State GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Safety & 
Security  File case reports to Court Bangalore 
Police  External N/A N/A N/A Ward Zone Yes No
Safety & 
Security  Conducting spot visits  Bangalore 
Police  State GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Safety & 
Security  Conducting investigations  Bangalore 
Police  State GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Safety & 
Security  Conducting chemical, medical, forensic 
investigations  Bangalore 
Police  External  N/A N/A N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Safety & 
Security  Conducting Inquests  Bangalore 
Police  State GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Safety & 
Security  Making arrests  Bangalore 
Police  State N/A N/A N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Safety & 
Security  Taking custody of arrested persons  Bangalore 
Police  State N/A N/A N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Safety & 
Security  Publishing unnatural deaths/missing persons 
list in media  Bangalore 
Police  State GBA Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Safety & 
Security  Operating Police Control Room  Bangalore 
Police  State GBA GBA  N/A GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Safety & 
Security  Receipt of petitions  Bangalore 
Police  CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Safety & 
Security  Release of persons on bail  Bangalore 
Police  External  N/A N/A N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Safety & 
Security  Preparation of charge sheets  Bangalore 
Police  External  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-48 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Safety & 
Security  Conducting raids  Bangalore 
Police  State N/A N/A N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Safety & 
Security  Providing Police Escort  Bangalore 
Police  CPU  GBA GBA  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Safety & 
Security  Issue of Summons, Warrants  Bangalore 
Police  State GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Safety & 
Security  Identification of beat areas Bangalore 
Police  CPU N/A Zone N/A Ward Zone Yes Yes
Safety &  
Security  Performing beat operations  Bangalore 
Police  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No Yes 
Safety & 
Security  Deployment of personnel for special duties  Bangalore 
Police  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Safety & 
Security  Providing Passport verification services  Bangalore 
Police  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Safety & 
Security  Providing Police verification services  Bangalore 
Police  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Safety & 
Security  Issue of  licenses, permissions & No Objection 
Certificate  Bangalore  
Police  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Safety & 
Security  Issue/renewal of arms licence  Bangalore 
Police  External  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Safety & 
Security  Maintenance of rowdies/criminal 
miscellaneous details  Bangalore 
Police  CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Service Fees  Collection of fees for verification services Bangalore 
Police  CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Service Fees  Providing security services for private parties  Bangalore 
Police  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Complaints 
Handling  Setting up & operating helpline  RTO  CPU  GBA GBA  GBA  GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Information  Conducting awareness campaigns & events  RTO  CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes Yes 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-49 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Infrastructure  Establishment & operation of drivers' training 
& research centre  RTO  CPU  GBA Zone  Zone  Zone  GBA  Yes No 
Infrastructure  Establishment & operation of vehicle testing & 
certification centre  RTO  CPU  GBA Zone  Zone  Zone  GBA  Yes No 
Infrastructure  Setting up & operation of automated driver 
testing tracks  RTO  CPU  GBA Zone  Zone  Zone  GBA  Yes No 
Registration  Issue of Driving Licences  RTO  State GBA N/A N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Registration  Renewal of Driving Licences  RTO  State GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Registration  Registration of vehicles  RTO  State GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Registration  Issue of Duplicate Licences, Registration 
Certificates etc.  RTO  State GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Registration  Issue of Public Service Vehicle Badge to Drivers  RTO  State GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Registration  Issue of License & renewal for driving schools  RTO  State GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Registration  Issue conductor license & renewal and badge 
distribution  RTO  State GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Registration  Providing temporary registration  RTO  State GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Registration  Transfer of ownership  RTO  State GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Registration Registration of hypothecation entry/lease 
agreement  RTO State GBA Zone N/A Ward Zone Yes No
Registration  Issue of Clearance/releasing certificate  RTO  State GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Registration  Issue of fitness certificates  RTO  State GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Regulation  Enforcement of provisions under Motor 
Vehicle Act  RTO  State GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Complaints 
Handling  Establishment &  operation of Public Grievance 
Redressal cell  Stamps & 
Registration 
Dept.  CPU  GBA GBA  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes No 
Complaints 
Handling  Setting up & operating helpline  Stamps & 
Registration CPU  GBA GBA  GBA  GBA  GBA  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-50 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Dept.  
Information  Publishing valuation in  all places for the 
information of public  Stamps & 
Registration 
Dept.  CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Property  Issue of Encumbrance Certificates & Certified 
copy  Stamps & 
Registration 
Dept.  External  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Property  Endorsements on the market value in respect 
of a particular property  Stamps & 
Registration 
Dept.  CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Registration  Provision of registration services  Stamps & 
Registration 
Dept.  External  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Registration  Provision  of deposit/opening of wills services  Stamps & 
Registration 
Dept.  State GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Registration  Providing rectification of deficiencies' services  Stamps & 
Registration 
Dept.  State GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Registration  Stamping of insufficiently stamped 
instruments executed outside the state  Stamps & 
Registration 
Dept.  State GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Regulation  Conducting market value assessment & stamp 
duty evaluation Stamps & 
Registration 
Dept.  CPU  GBA GBA  N/A GBA  GBA  Yes No 
Regulation  Detection of under valuation of properties  Stamps & 
Registration 
Dept.  CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Service Fees  Issue of certified copies of title deeds  Stamps & 
Registration CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-51 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Dept.  
Statistics  Scanning & archival of registered documents.  Stamps & 
Registration 
Dept.  CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Emergency 
Services  Setting up accident reduction & trauma care 
system  Traffic Police CPU  N/A GBA  Zone  N/A Zone  No No 
Emergency 
Services  Setting up accident response system  Traffic Police CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  No No 
Information  Organising awareness campaigns  Traffic Police CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Infrastructure  Establishment of training facilities & opn  Traffic Police State N/A Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Regulation  Enforcement of traffic rules  Traffic Police State GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Safety & 
SecurityRegistration of First Information Report  Traffic Police State GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Traffic  Preparation of traffic management plans  Traffic Police CPU  GBA GBA  GBA  N/A GBA  Yes No 
Traffic  Traffic management in special cases e.g., 
dharnas, VIP corridor etc.  Traffic Police CPU  N/A Zone  N/A Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Traffic  Management of traffic  Traffic Police CPU  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Traffic  Management of street/road parking  Traffic Police CPU  GBA Ward  N/A Ward Zone  Yes Yes 
Traffic  Determining & fixing of traffic fines  Traffic Police State N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No 
Traffic  Collection of traffic fines  Traffic Police CPU  GBA N/A N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Traffic  Establishment of infrastructure for traffic 
management  Traffic Police CPU  N/A Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Traffic  Setting up & operating signals & sign boards  Traffic Police CPU  N/A Zone  Zone  Ward Zone  Yes No 
Traffic  Installation of traffic enforcement cameras  Traffic Police CPU  N/A Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
Traffic  Conducting investigation in accident cases  Traffic Police External  GBA Zone  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Traffic  Establishment & operating of Traffic Traffic Police CPU  GBA Zone  Zone  Zone  Zone  Yes No 
  
 
  
APPENDIX – III : ACTIVITY MAPPING  
Page : A-52 Citizen 
Requirement  Activity  Current Service 
Provider  Technical 
Standards 
Setting  Service 
level 
Promise  Planning  Asset 
Creation  O&M Monitoring  IT 
Scope?  Ward 
Committee  
Management Centres  
Traffic  Issue of licenses, permission & No Objection 
CertificateTraffic Police State GBA GBA  N/A Ward Zone  Yes No 
Abbreviations: CPU= Central Process Unit; GBA= Greater Bangalore Authority; MC= Municipal Corporation.  
  
 
 
Page : A-53 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
APPENDIX  IV – GIS  MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-54 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-55 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 
 

  
 
 
Page : A-56 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-57 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 
 

  
 
 
Page : A-58 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 
 

  
 
 
Page : A-59 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-60 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-61 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-62 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-63 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 
 

  
 
 
Page : A-64 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 
 

  
 
 
Page : A-65 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  

  
 
 
Page : A-66 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-67 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-68 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-69 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-70 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-71 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-72 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 
 

  
 
 
Page : A-73 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-74 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 
 

  
 
 
Page : A-75 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-76 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-77 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-78 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-79 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-80 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-81 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 
 

  
 
 
Page : A-82 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 
 

  
 
 
Page : A-83 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-84 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-85 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-86 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 
 

  
 
 
Page : A-87 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 
 

  
 
 
Page : A-88 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-89 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-90 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 
 

  
 
 
Page : A-91 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-92 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-93 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 
 

  
 
 
Page : A-94 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 
  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-95 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-96 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 
 

  
 
 
Page : A-97 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-98 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-99 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-100 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-101 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-102 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-103 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-104 APPENDIX – IV : GIS MAPS  
 

  
 
 
Page : A-105  APPENDIX – V : USEFUL REFERENCES  
APPENDIX V:USEFUL REFERENCES
1.1 MUNICIPAL  FUNCTIONS  (TWELFTH  SCHEDULE  - ARTICLE  243  W) 
•Urban Planning including Town Planning.  
•Regulation of Land Use including Construction of Buildings.  
•Planning for Economic and Social Development.  
•Roads and Bridges  
•Water Supply for domestic, industrial and commercial purposes.  
•Public Health, Sanitation conservancy and solid waste management.  
•Fire Services  
•Urban Forestry, protection of environm ent and promotion of ecological aspects.  
•Safeguarding the interests of the weaker sections of the society, including 
handicapped and mentally retarded people.  
•Slum Improvement and upgradation.  
•Urban poverty alleviation.  
•Provision of Urban amenities and facilities such as parks, gardens and play grounds.  
•Promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects.  
•Burials and burial grounds; cremations, cremation grounds and crematoriums.  
•Cattle ponds; prevention of cruelty to animals.  
•Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths.  
•Public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus stops and public 
conveniences.  
•Regulation of s Laughter houses and tanneries  
  
  
 
 
Page : A-106  APPENDIX – V : USEFUL REFERENCES  
1.2 SOME OF THE MAJOR ACTS APPLICABLE FOR BENGALURU  
 
oConstitutional Law  
oConstitution of India, 1950  
o74th Constitution Amendment Act, 1993  
oStatutes  
oBangalore Development Authority Act, 1976  
oBangalore Metropolitan Region Development Authority Act, 1985  
oBangalore Water Supply & Sewerage Board Act, 1964  
oKarnataka Housing Board Act, 1962  
oKarnataka Industrial Areas Development Board Act, 1966  
oKarnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961  
oKarnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964  
oKarnataka Municipal Corporations Act 1976  
oKarnataka Municipalities Act, 1964  
oKarnataka Panchayat Raj Act, 1993  
oKarnataka Town and Country Planning Act, 1961  
oCitizen Participation Bill - KMC (Amendment) Act , 2011  
oBIAPA  
oNotifications / Rules  
oKarnataka Municipal Corporations (Ward Committee) Rules, 1997  
oSolid Waste Management, 2013  
  
  
 
 
Page : A-107  APPENDIX – V : USEFUL REFERENCES  
1.3 PARASTATAL AGENCIES WITH ACTIVITIES IN BE NGALURU  
S No. Parastatal body  Services Provided  
1.  Bangalore Development 
Authority  
(BDA)  
 Urban planner, responsible for urban and town 
planning, regulation of land use and construction of 
buildings, planning for social and economic 
development, provision of urban  amenities.  
2.  Bangalore Water Supply and 
Sewerage Board (BWSSB)  Water and sewage disposal  
3.  Bangalore Metropolitan Rail 
Corporation (BMRC)  Construction of the metro rail in Bangalore.  
4. Bangalore Metropolitan Land 
Transport Authority (BMLTA  Umbrella organisation to coordinate planning and 
implementation of urban transport programmes and 
projects in the Bangalore Metropolitan Region.  
5. Bangalore Electricity Supply 
Company Limited (BESCOM)  Distribution of power supply in Bangalore Urban, 
Bang alore Rural, Kolar, Tumkur, Chitradurga, Davangere, 
Ramnagaram, and Chikballapura areas  
6. Bangalore Metropolitan Region  
Development Authority 
(BMRDA)  Planning, coordination, and supervision of the orderly 
development of areas within the Bangalore 
Metropolitan Region (8022 sq. km.).  
7. Bangalore Mysore 
Infrastructure Corridor Area 
Planning Authority  
(BMICAPA)  Planned development of the corridor between 
Bangalore and Mysore known as Local Planning Area, 
comprising a total area of about 701 sq. km. including 
140 revenue villages, 54 part villages, and  Maddur town.  
8. Bangalore International Airport 
Area Planning Authority 
(BIAAPA)  Nodal agency constituted by the GoK (Government of 
Karnataka) for the orderly devel opment of the areas 
near Bangalore International Airport at Devenahalli.  
9. Lake Development Authority  
(LDA)  
 Autonomous regulatory, planning and policy body for 
the protection, conservation, reclamation, restoration, 
regeneration, and integrated development of natural 
and man -made lakes.
10. Bangalore Metropolitan 
Transport Corporation (BMTC)  Providing an affordable, reliable, safe, and efficient 
transport system for commuters in the city and 
suburban areas of Bangalore.  
11. Karnataka Slum Development  
Board (KSDB)  Environmen tal improvement clearance and 
redevelopment of the slums.  
12. Karnataka Urban Infrastructure  
Development Finance  
Corporation (KUIDFC)  Assisting the urban agencies in the state in planning, 
financing, and providing expertise for developing urban 
infrastructure.  
13. Directorate of Urban Land  
Transport (DULT)  Ensuring the integration of transport planning and the 
development of transport infrastructure in urban areas.  
14. Karnataka Housing Board  
(KHB)Provision of affordable housing  
15. Karnata ka Industrial Areas 
Development Board (KIADB)  Land acquisition and infrastructure development for 
rapid Industrial Development  
  
 
 
Page : A-108  APPENDIX – V : USEFUL REFERENCES  
1.4 TERMINOLOGY  
Terminology  Expansion  Jurisdiction (sq kms)  
BBMP  Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagar 
Palike  709.5  
BDA  Bengaluru Development 
Authority  1219.5 (without NICE)  
  1307 (with NIC)  
BMA  Bengaluru Metropolitan Area  1307  
BMR  Bengaluru Metropolitan Region  8,005  
1.5 MP S / MLA S ROLE IN MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS BY STATES  
State  MP MLA  
Andhra Pradesh  Yes(NV)  Yes(NV)  
Assam  Yes(V)  Yes(V)  
Bihar  Yes(V)  Yes(V)  
Haryana  Yes(V)  Yes(V)  
Himachal Pradesh  No Yes(V)*  
Kerala  No No 
Karnataka  Yes(V)  Yes(V)  
Madhya Pradesh  Yes(NV)  Yes(NV)  
Rajasthan  Yes(V)  Yes(V)  
Tamil Nadu  Yes(NV)  Yes(NV)  
Uttar Pradesh  Yes(V)  Yes(V)  
Gujarat  No No 
Maharashtra  No No 
Orissa  No No 
Tripura  No No 
Punjab  No Yes(V)  
West Bengal  No No 
V – Voting; NV – Non Voting  
  
 
 
APPENDIX – VI : ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
Page : A-109  APPENDIX  VI: ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
At the outset, the Committee would like to thank the Government of Karnataka, led  by its 
Chief Minister, Shri Siddaramaiah  and the Bengaluru District Minister, Shri. Ramalinga 
Reddy for reposing faith in the Expert Committee to undertake this responsibility. We are 
also obliged to Mr. Manivannan P (IAS) and Mr. V. Yash vant h (IAS) who assisted the 
Committee as Member Secretary  at different points of time. The back office of the 
Committee led by Mr. Shankar and assisted by Ramoji, Ramesh, Maruti and Srikant  ensured 
that all the logistic needs of the Committee were met. IDeCK through its CEO, Mr. K. 
Jayakishan and Pratap Surathkar supported the Committee in its outsourcing activities. Mr. 
K. Puttaswamy and Narayana helped turn around the Kannada version in a record time.  
This exercise and the report would not be possible without the unstinted cooperation of multiple stakeholders including Elected representatives, Government officials, Institutions  
(like BPAC, FKCCI), Citizen groups, Individuals, Media who participated in the deliberations, expressed their opinions and gave suggestions to the Expert Committee in person and through the web site. The list is available at www.bbmprestructuring.org .  
There are specific Institutions and Individuals that we would like to acknowledge who 
helped with the final analysis and report elements. Ma ny of the Institutional efforts were  in 
the form of pro bono contribution of time / resources and others were contractual 
arrangements:  
•Azim Premji University – Anurag Behar, Sudhir Krishnaswami, Mathew Idi culla, 
Narayana A , Nafis  Hasan , S Badrinarayanan  and others  
•World Resources Institute  India  / EMBARQ – Madhav Pai, Rejeet Mathews , Surya  
Prakash , Raj Bhagat and others  
•Janaagraha – Srikanth Vishwanathan, Anil Nair, Kartika Nair and o thers  
•Centre for Public Problem Solving – Ashwin Mahesh, Smita Srinivas, Maya Roy, Ankit 
Bhargava and others  
•Indian Institute of Science – Prof T V Ramachandra  and others  
•Indian Institute of Management – Prof Gopal Naik and others  
•Indian Institute of Human Settlements – Aromer Revi , Satish Selvakumar and others  
•CIVIC – Kathyayi ni Chamaraj  
  
 
 
APPENDIX – VI : ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
Page : A-110  •CSTEP – Jai Asundi and others  
•ONZE – Rahul RS  and others  
•Sky Group – Akash, Gargi Ghosh and others  
•Centre for Legal and Policy Research – Aparna Ravi  and others  
•MAGC – Ashok Rao, Prasad, Deepna and others  
•Indian Institute of Social & Economic Change – Prof.  Gayaitri, H Madhes and others  
•TR Raghunandan (I.A.S. Retd), Abhinay D ronavally, Varun Ramachandra , Arjun Chetna . 
 
Thank You!  
===== END FILE: bbmp-restructuring-fullreport.pdf =====

===== START FILE: BCAP_FullReport_091224.pdf =====
  
   
 
 
  

 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    2  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This report should be referred to as the ‘Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan 
(BCAP) , 2023’"  
"All maps in this report are intended as visualizations to communicate city -wide data analysis for 
information purposes only and are not to  scale.   
  
  
Contact for this report  
specialcommissionerfeccbbmp@gmail.com   
 
  
 

 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    3  
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  26 
VISION: TOWARDS A NET ZERO AND CLIMATE -RESILIENT BENGALURU  ................................ ...................  29 
1 INTRODUCTION  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  31 
1.1 Approach and key steps  ................................ ................................ ............................  33 
1.2 Encouraging participation in the formulation of the BCAP  ................................ ..... 36 
1.3 Addressing  inclusivity and equity in the BCAP  ................................ ........................  38 
1.4 Aligning BCAP with global, national, and sub -national planning goals  ...................  39 
1.5 Scope, limitations, and exclusions  ................................ ................................ ...........  40 
1.6 How to read this report  ................................ ................................ .............................  41 
2 BENGALURU CITY CONTEXT  AND SECTORAL ASSESSMENTS ................................ .........................  43 
2.1 City context  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  43 
2.1.1  Climatic and ecological landscape context  ................................ ............................  45 
2.1.2  Urban landscape  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 47 
2.1.3  Socio -economic context  ................................ ................................ ........................  50 
2.2 Sectoral status and emerging c hallenges  ................................ ................................ ..66 
2.2.1  Energy and buildings  ................................ ................................ ............................. 66 
2.2.2  Transportation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 69 
2.2.3  Solid waste management  ................................ ................................ .......................  73 
2.2.4  Air quality  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  78 
2.2.5  Water, wastewater, and storm water management  ................................ ...............  81 
2.2.6  Urban planning, greening, and biodiversity ................................ ..........................  85 
2.2.7  Disaster management  ................................ ................................ ............................  91 
2.3 Existing governance and institutional structure  ................................ ....................... 96 
2.3.1  Guiding governance framework  ................................ ................................ ............ 96 
2.3.2  City-level functions and responsible agencies  ................................ ....................... 96 
3 BASELINE ASSESSMENT FOR BENGALURU: CCRA -VA AND GHG INVENTORY  ................................ .. 100 
3.1 Climate Change Risk and Vulnerability Assessment (CCRA -VA) ..........................  100 
3.1.1  Objective and components of CCRA -VA ................................ .............................  100 
3.1.2  Climate trends in Bengaluru and adjoining regions: Recent past and future 
scenarios  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  101 
3.1.3  Assessment of Climate Hazards for Bengaluru  ................................ ...................  103 
3.1.4  Climate Hazard Impact Assessment for Bengaluru  ................................ ............  116 
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    4  
3.1.5  Summarising Bengaluru’s Climate Hazard Risk and Vulnerability Assessment  118 
3.2 GHG inventory: Sources and sinks  ................................ ................................ .........  122 
3.2.1  Scope and approach for GHG emissions inventory  ................................ ............  122 
3.2.2  Critical sources  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 124 
3.2.3  Understanding the linkage between GHG emissions and air quality in Bengaluru
 129 
3.2.4  Carbon sinks  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  130 
4 FUTURE EMISSION MITIGATION PATHWAYS FOR BENGALURU  ................................ .....................  135 
4.1 Future Emission Mitigation Pathways: Methodology  ................................ ............  136 
4.2 Future emission scenarios  ................................ ................................ ......................  137 
4.2.1  Business -as-usual scenario  ................................ ................................ ..................  138 
4.2.2  Existing and planned scenario  ................................ ................................ ............  138 
4.2.3  Ambitious scenario  ................................ ................................ ..............................  139 
4.2.4  Extended scenario for achieving net zero emission targets in Bengaluru  ..........  145 
4.3 Impact of future GHG emissions on Bengaluru’s air quality and public health  ..... 148 
4.3.1  Summary of Pathways AQ Integration Study results  ................................ ..........  152 
5 SECTORAL GOALS AND ACTIONS FOR MITIGATION AND ADAPTATION  ................................ ...........  154 
5.1 Identifying sectoral priorities and barriers  ................................ .............................  154 
5.2 Framing of actions under the BCAP: A holistic approach  ................................ ...... 156 
5.3 Sector -wise action recommendations  ................................ ................................ ..... 160 
5.3.1  Energy and buildings  ................................ ................................ ...........................  161 
5.3.2  Transportation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 178 
5.3.3  Solid waste management  ................................ ................................ ..................... 207 
5.3.4  Air quality  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  223 
5.3.5  Water, wastewater, and stormwater management ................................ .............. 234 
5.3.6  Urban planning, greening, and biodiversity ................................ .......................  260 
5.3.7  Disaster management  ................................ ................................ .........................  282 
5.4 Fostering inclusivity in climate action  ................................ ................................ .... 297 
6 GOVERNANCE OF BCAP AND INSTITUTIONAL STRUCTURES  ................................ .......................  302 
6.1 Aligning BCAP governance with existing institutional structures  .........................  302 
6.2 Setting up a Climate Action Cell  and support mechanisms for the BCAP  .............  305 
6.3 Funding climate action for Bengaluru  ................................ ................................ .....311 
6.3.1  Existing budgetary provisions for financing climate action in cities  ................... 311 
6.4 Preparing a climate budget for Bengaluru  ................................ ..............................  317 
7 MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING AND LEARNING FOR BCAP  ................................ .............  321 
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    5  
7.1 Monitoring  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  322 
7.2 Evaluation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  327 
7.3 Reporting and learning  ................................ ................................ ........................... 329 
7.4 Operational framework for the BCAP -MER: Structures and tools  ......................... 329 
8 WAY FORWARD  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  334 
ANNEXURES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  336 
A. List of stakeholder departments/agencies consulted  ................................ .............  337 
List of participants in the expert consultation  ................................ ................................ .. 338 
B.  GHG emission inventory  ................................ ................................ ..............................  340 
B.1. GHG accounting and reporting standards for cities  ................................ ..................  340 
B.2 Detailed Methodology of Sector -wise GHG Emission Calculations  ............................  343 
B.3 Methodology for estimating carbon sinks using I -Tree Canopy Tool  ......................... 358 
C. Extended Scenario and Sector -wise Barrier Analysis  ................................ .............  359 
D. Details on change in Blue -Green Network in Bengaluru  ................................ ........  372 
E. Sector -wise Evaluation Indicators  ................................ ................................ ..........  374 
F. Brief on population projections  ................................ ................................ .............  383 
G. Minutes of meeting  ................................ ................................ ................................  390 
H. Technical specifications and summary of Pathways -AQ rapid scoping tool by C40 
cities  405 
I. Sector -wise Institutional Mapping  ................................ ................................ .........  414 
J. Climate budget  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  426 
J.1. C40 climate budget pilot programme  ................................ ................................ .........  426 
J.2. Mumbai – Draft Climate budget template  ................................ ................................ . 428 
Glossary ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 429 
Bibliography  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  438 
 
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    6  
LIST OF FIGURES  
 
Figure 1 Approach to the preparation of the BCAP  ................................ ................................ . 34 
Figure 2 Sectoral alignment of BCAP for action framing  ................................ ........................  35 
Figure 3 Key milestones in BCAP preparation  ................................ ................................ ........  35 
Figure 4 Three -pronged approach for stakeholder consultations  ................................ ...........  36 
Figure 5: Geographical location and relevant administrative jurisdictions for Bengaluru and 
its adjoining area ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  43 
Figure 6 Population growth in Bengaluru  ................................ ................................ ............... 44 
Figure 7: River valley system of Bengaluru and the adjoining region  ................................ ..... 45 
Figure 8 Geographical and hydrological context of Bengaluru within Cauvery -Ponnaiyar Basin 
region  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 46 
Figure 9 Physical geography and jurisdictions of BBMP, BMA and BMR  .............................  48 
Figure 10 Built footprint evolution across Bengaluru (Between 1985 to 2019)  ...................... 49 
Figure 11 Key demographic parameters of Bengaluru  ................................ .............................  52 
Figure 12 Distribution of population density by ward  ................................ .............................  53 
Figure 13 Key socio -economic parameters of Bengaluru  ................................ ........................  55 
Figure 14 Location of slums along with population density distribution as per built settlement
................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  56 
Figure 15 Key Accessibility parameters of Bengaluru ................................ ..............................  58 
Figure 16  Ward -wise lack of prevalence of clean cooking fuel  ................................ ................  59 
Figure 17 Ward -wise lack of access to treated drinking water  ................................ ...............  60 
Figure 18 Ward -wise access to piped sewer and septic tanks ................................ ..................  61 
Figure 19 Access to public transport (bus stops) within 5 -minute walkable distance  ............  62 
Figure 20 Access to government hospitals within 10 -minute of ambulance service area .......  63 
Figure 21 Access to fire stations within 7 -minute standard response time for fire tenders  ....64 
Figure 22 Access to parks and grounds within 10 -minute walkable distance  .........................  65 
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    7  
Figure 23 Priority sectors identified for targeted actions  ................................ ........................ 66 
Figure 24 Fuel share of different transport modes in Bengaluru for 2019  .............................  70 
Figure 25: Solid waste composition in Bengaluru  ................................ ................................ ... 74 
Figure 26: Location of currently functional landfill and processing units in Bengaluru  ........  75 
Figure 27 Built -up growth of Bengaluru  ................................ ................................ .................  86 
Figure 28: Departments of the BBMP and their functions  ................................ .....................  97 
Figure 29 Institutional mapping of the sectors considered in the BCAP  ...............................  98 
Figure 30 Parameters used for Vulnerability and Risk Assessment  ................................ ..... 100  
Figure 31 Inter -annual average accumulative rainfall between 1985 and 2020  ...................  101 
Figure 32  Inter -annual mean air temperature between 1975 and 2021  ................................  102 
Figure 33  Flood risk zones in Bengaluru city  ................................ ................................ .......  105 
Figure 34 Average land surface temperature over built areas of the city (summer months 2017 -
2021)  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 107 
Figure 35: Taluk level Stage of Groundwater Development (Groundwater extraction rate to 
recharge rate) for Bengaluru Metropolitan Region  ................................ ...............................  110 
Figure 36 Summarising order of priority based on hazard exposure - Surface flooding, urban 
heat and air pollution ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  117 
Figure 37 Summarising order of priority based on sensitivity parameters  ...........................  119 
Figure 38 Summarising order of priority based on (lack of) adaptive capacity  ....................  120 
Figure 40 Sector -wise share of total GHG emissions in Bengaluru  ................................ ...... 125 
Figure 41 Emissions from sub -sectors  ................................ ................................ ...................  125 
Figure 42 Contributors to the stationary energy sector's GHG emissions in Bengaluru (2019)
................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  126 
Figure 43 Contributors to the transport sector's GHG emissions in Bengaluru (2019)  .......  127 
Figure 44 Mode -wise contributors to transport sector emissions (in million metric tonnes of 
CO 2e and %)  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  128 
Figure 45: Contributors of the waste sector's GHG emissions for Bengaluru (2019)  ...........  128 
Figure 46: Baseline PM2.5 concentration by sector  ................................ ..............................  130 
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    8  
Figure 47 Estimates of carbon emitted and stored annually by Trees outside Forests in 
Bengaluru between 2001 and 2022, and zone -wise tree canopy cover density (2001 and 2022)
................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  133 
Figure 48 Long -term GHG emission mitigation potential achieved under different scenarios 
for Bengaluru  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  135 
Figure 49 Population and GDP projections from Base Year  ................................ .................  137 
Figure 50 Future emission scenarios  ................................ ................................ .....................  137 
Figure 51 Business -as-usual scenario emission estimate  ................................ ......................  138 
Figure 52 Emission reduction potential of actions in the E&P scenario  ...............................  139 
Figure 53 Emission reduction potential of actions in the ambitious scenario  ......................  140 
Figure 54: Remaining emissions after ambitious scenario actions  ................................ .......  141 
Figure 55: Types of enabling actions  ................................ ................................ .....................  142 
Figure 56 Emission reduction potential of actions in the extended scenario  .......................  145 
Figure 57 BAU PM2.5 concentration estimate  ................................ ................................ ...... 149 
Figure 58 Change in PM2.5 concentration per action for the E&P scenario  .........................  150 
Figure 59 Change in PM2.5 concentration per action for the ambitious scenario  .................  151 
Figure 60 Estimated sectoral contributions of PM2.5 air pollution in Bengaluru if ambitious 
scenario is completely implemented  ................................ ................................ .....................  152 
Figure 61 Action -framing process  ................................ ................................ ..........................  159 
Figure 62: Action prioritisation  ................................ ................................ .............................  160 
Figure 63: Approach for energy and buildings sector  ................................ ...........................  161 
Figure 64: Approach for sustainable transportation  ................................ .............................  178 
Figure 65: Approach for Integrated Solid Waste Management  ................................ ............. 207  
Figure 66: Approach for improving air quality ................................ ................................ ...... 223  
Figure 67: Approach for Integrated Urban Water Management  ................................ ........... 234  
Figure 68: Approach to urban planning, greening, and biodiversity  ................................ ... 260  
Figure 69: Approach for disaster risk reduction  ................................ ................................ .. 282  
Figure 71 Tenets of BCAP governance  ................................ ................................ ..................  302  
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    9  
Figure 72 BCAP governance structure  ................................ ................................ ...................  307  
Figure 73: Constitution of the Bengaluru Climate Action Cell  ................................ ..............  310 
Figure 75  BBMP budget 2023 –24 ................................ ................................ .........................  315 
Figure 76 Monitoring, evaluation, and reporting (MER) framework  ................................ ... 321 
Figure 77 Example from Kuala Lumpur's and Salvador’s CAPs  ................................ ............  322  
Figure 78: Monitoring to evaluation reasoning flow -chart  ................................ ..................  328  
Figure 79 Schematic illustration of MER operations of the BCAP  ................................ ........  332  
Figure 80: Key Activity contributing GHG emissions in Stationary Energy Sector  .............. 346  
Figure 81 ASIF Framework  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 348  
Figure 82 Methodology system boundaries  ................................ ................................ .......... 349  
Figure 83 Mode -wise contributors of transport sector emissions (in MMT CO 2e) ...............  353 
Figure 84  Built -Up Area and Vegetation Loss Overlap Significantly in Bengaluru and 
Vegetation Gains Are Distinctly Visible along Two Rivers Flowing Out of the City to the South
................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  372 
Figure 85  Maps Showing Groundwater Recharge Potential in Bengaluru Indicating 
Substantial New Development Sited on High and Very High Recharge Potential Zones  ..... 372 
Figure 86: Planning Jurisdictions  ................................ ................................ ........................  383  
Figure 87: Growth of population in Bengaluru  ................................ ................................ .... 384  
Figure 88:Different municipal corporations and population densities, 2011  ....................... 385  
Figure 89: Bengaluru’s estimated population density distribution  ................................ ..... 386  
Figure 90: Air quality implications of climate actions in the E&P scenario .......................... 407  
Figure 91: Health implications of climate actions in the E&P scenario  ...............................  409  
Figure 92: Air quality implications of climate actions in the Ambitious scenario  ................  410 
Figure 93: Health implications of climate actions in the Ambitious scenario  ......................  411 
Figure 94: Air quality implications of climate actions in the Extended scenario ..................  411 
Figure 95: Health implications of climate actions in the Extended scenario  ........................  412 
Figure 96 Overview of the key activities and responsibilities in the energy sector (electricity)
................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  414 
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    10  
Figure 97 Institutional Mapping of the Energy and Buildings sector  ................................ ... 415 
Figure 98 Institutional Mapping of the Transportation sector  ................................ .............  416 
Figure 99 Institutional Mapping of the Solid Waste Management sector  ............................  417 
Figure 100 Institutional Mapping of the Air Quality sector  ................................ ..................  418 
Figure 101 Institutional Mapping of the Water, Wastewater and Stormwater Management 
sector  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 419 
Figure 102 Institutional Mapping of the Urban Planning, Greening and Biodiversity sector
................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  421 
Figure 103 Institutional Mapping of the agencies involved in overall Disaster Management
................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................ 423  
Figure 104 Institutional Mapping of the agencies involved in Urban flooding Management
................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  424  
 
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    11  
LIST OF TABLES    
 
Table 1: Indicative examples of policies and frameworks considered for preparation of the 
BCAP  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  39 
Table 2 Ongoing initiatives in the energy and buildings sector in Bengaluru  .........................  67 
Table 3 Ongoing initiatives in the transportation sector in Bengaluru  ................................ ... 70 
Table 4 Ongoing solid waste management initiatives in Bengaluru  ................................ .......  76 
Table 5 Ongoing initiatives in the air quality sector in Bengaluru  ................................ ..........  79 
Table 6 Ongoing initiatives in water, wastewater, and stormwater sector in Bengaluru  .......  82 
Table 7 Ongoing initiatives in the urban planning and greening and biodiversity sectors in 
Bengaluru  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 87 
Table 8 Taluk -wise rainfall in August 2022 for BUD region  ................................ ...................  91 
Table 9 Ongoing initiatives for disaster risk reduction in Bengaluru  ................................ ..... 92 
Table 10 Key observations of air pollutants for Bengaluru city  ................................ .............  112 
Table 11 Likelihood of identified hazards and significant associated sectors  ........................ 113 
Table 12 Impacts of climate hazards on various sectors  ................................ ......................... 113 
Table 13: Sources of data collected  ................................ ................................ ........................  124 
Table 14 Summary of GHG emission reduction under E&P and Ambitious Scenarios  ........  141 
Table 15: Ambitious scenario strategy goals and targets for Bengaluru  ................................  144 
Table 16 Sectoral priorities and barriers identified for each sector  ................................ ...... 154 
Table 17 Actions recommended to ensure coherence  ................................ ...........................  303  
Table 18 Actions recommended to catalyse ownership  ................................ ........................  304  
Table 19 Actions recommended to build capacity for implementing the BCAP  ...................  304  
Table 20: Illustrative example of CAP action implementation monitoring template  ...........  323  
Table 21: Sample of BCAP action outcome monitoring template  ................................ .........  325 
Table 22: Indicators for BCAP impact monitoring  ................................ ................................ 326  
Table 23: GHG and GWP as per 5AR  ................................ ................................ ...................  340  
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    12  
Table 24: Categorisation of emissions by scope  ................................ ................................ .... 341 
Table 25: GPC framework reporting levels  ................................ ................................ ............  341 
Table 26: Sectors and sub -sectors  ................................ ................................ ......................... 342  
Table 27: Methodology Reference  ................................ ................................ .........................  343  
Table 28: Emission Factors used to Calculate Scope 1 GHG emissions  ................................ 344  
Table 29: Emission Factors used to Calculate Scope 2 GHG emissions  ................................  345 
Table 30: Stationary Energy sector’s GHG emissions  ................................ ........................... 346  
Table 31 Scope of Transport Sector for Bengaluru’s GHG Inventory  ................................ .... 347 
Table 32 Emission factors used for calculating transport sector GHG emissions  ................  351 
Table 33 Features of Data Sources  ................................ ................................ ........................  351 
Table 34 Methodology adopted for calculating transport sector GHG emissions for Bengaluru
................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  351 
Table 35 Transport sector GHG emissions  ................................ ................................ ............  352 
Table 36: The emission sources and approach categorised in the GPC for waste sector:  ..... 354 
Table 37: Data points considered for the GHG emission inventory  ................................ ...... 355 
Table 38: Outline of waste sector emissions in Bengaluru, 2019  ................................ ..........  357 
Table 39: Planning jurisdictions and population densities  ................................ ..................  384  
Table 40: Population and growth rate of the BBMP area for the past three decades  ..........  384  
Table 41:Understanding area and population density in the past decade in other metropolitan 
cities  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 385  
Table 42: Assumptions/conditions applied by different sources  ................................ ..........  387 
Table 43: Population growth for the next three decades from different sources:  ................  388  
Table 44: Estimated changes in air pollution and premature mortality associated with the 
implementation of Bengaluru’s Climate Action Plan scenarios  ................................ ...........  406  
Table 45 Climate Budget Template  ................................ ................................ .......................  428  
 
 
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    13  
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS    
 
AFOLU  Agriculture, Forestry and Other Lan d Use  
AI Artificial Intelligence  
AI-ML Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  
AMRUT  Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation  
AOA Scheme  Afforestation on Other Areas  
AQ Air Quality  
AQI Air Quality Index  
AQMC  Air Quality Monitoring Committee  
AR Assessment Report  
ASHRAE  American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air -Conditioning Engineers  
ASP  Activated Sludge Process  
BAU  Business As Usual  
BBMP  Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike  
BCAP  Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan  
BDA  Bangalore Development Authority  
BEE  Bureau of Energy Efficiency  
BESCOM  Bangalore Electricity Supply Company Limited  
BIAPPA  Bangalore International Airport Area Planning Authority  
BMA  Bangalore Metropolitan Area  
BMC  Biodiversity Management Committee  
BMLTA  Bengaluru Metropolitan Land Transport Authority  
BMR  Bangalore Metropolitan Region  
BMRCL  Bengaluru Metro Rail Corporation Limited  
BMRDA  Bangalore Metropolitan Region Development Authority  
BMTC  Bengaluru Metropolitan Transport Corporation  
BNR  Biological Nutrient Removal  
BOD  Biochemical Oxygen Demand  
BSCOM  Bangalore Electricity Supply Company Limited  
BSWML  Bengaluru Solid Waste Management Limited  
BTP  Bengaluru Traffic Police  
BUA  Bangalore Urban Agglomeration  
BUD  Bengaluru Urban District  
BWG  Bulk waste generators  
BWSSB  Bangalore Water Supply & Sewerage Board  
C&D  Construction and Demolition  
CAAQMS  Continuous Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Station  
CAA  Citizenship Amendment Act  
CAC  Climate Action Cell  
CAGR  Compound Annual Growth Rate  
CAP  Climate Action Plan  
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    14  
CBG  Compressed Biogas  
CCRA  Climate Change Risk Assessment  
CESL  Convergence Energy Services Limited  
CGWB  Central Ground Water Board  
CH4  Methane  
CIRIS  Cities Inventory Reporting and Information  System  
CMP  Comprehensive Mobility Plan  
CNG  Compressed Natural Gas  
CO Carbon Monoxide  
CO2  Carbon Dioxide  
CO2e  Carbon Dioxide Equivalent  
COD  Chemical Oxygen Demand  
COVID  Coronavirus Disease  
CPCB  Central Pollution Control Board  
Cr Crore  
CSCAF  Climate Smart Cities Assessment Framework  
CSTEP  Center for Study of Science , Technology and Policy  
CWSS  Cauvery Water Supply Scheme  
DCR  Development Control Regulations  
DDMP  District Disaster Management Plan  
DMC  Deputy Municipal Commissioners  
DMP  Disaster Management Plan  
DTCP  Directorate of Town and Country Planning  
DULT  Directorate of Urban Land Transport  
DWCC  Dry Waste Collection Centres  
E&P Scenario  Existing & Planned Scenario  
ECBC  Energy Conservation Building Code  
EF  Emission Factor  
EIE Environmental Insights Explorer  
EMPRI  Environmental Management & Policy Research Institute  
ENS  Eco Niwas Samhita  
ERV  Energy Recovery Ventilation  
EV Electric Vehicle  
EWS  Economically Weaker Section  
FAME  Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of Electric Vehicles in India  
FAR  Floor Area Ratio  
FSI Floor Space Index  
FVA  Flood Vulnerable Area  
GAIL  Gas Authority of India Limited  
GDP  Gross Domestic Product  
GHG  Greenhouse Gas  
GIS Geographic Information System  
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    15  
GoI Government of India  
GoK  Government of Karnataka  
GPC  Global Protocol for Community -Scale Greenhouse Gas Emission 
Inventories  
GPS  Global positioning system  
GRIHA  Green Rating for Integrated Habitat Assessment  
GRP  Groundwater recharge potential  
GSDP  Gross State Domestic Product  
GUA Scheme  Greening Urban Area Scheme  
GWD  Ground Water Directorate  
GWP  Global Warming Potential  
GWP  Ground Water Potential  
ha/yr  Hectare s Per Year 
HEPA  High Efficiency Particulate Air  
HIG  Higher Income Groups  
HRV  Heat Recovery Ventilation  
IAQ Indoor Air Quality  
ICAP  Inclusive Climate Action Planning  
ICLEI  International Council for Local Environmental Initiatives  
ICT Information and Communication Technology  
IEA International Energy Agency  
IEC Information, Education & Communication  
IGBC  Indian Green Building Council  
IISc Indian Institute of Science  
ILI Influenza -Like Illness  
IMD  India Meteorological Department  
INR  Indian Rupees  
IoT Internet of Things  
IPCC  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  
IPPU  Industrial Processes and Product Use  
IPR Intellectual Property Rights  
IPT Intermediate Public Transport  
IRERM  Integrated Renewable Energy Resource Management  
ISWM  Integrated Solid Waste Management  
IT Information Technology  
ITS Intelligent Transportation Systems  
IUWM  Integrated Urban Water Management  
JNNSM  Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission  
K-ECBC  Karnataka Energy Conservation Building Code  
KEONICS  Karnataka State Electronics Development Corporation  
KPCL  Karnataka Power Corporation Limited  
KPI Key Performance Indicator  
KPTCL  Karnataka Power Transmission Corporation Limited  
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    16  
KREDL  Karnataka Renewable Energy Development Limited  
K-RIDE  Rail Infrastructure Development Company  (Karnataka) Limited  
KSAPCC  Karnataka State Action Plan for Climate Change  
KSDB  Karnataka Slum Development Board  
KSDMA  Karnataka State Disaster Management Authority  
KSNDMC  Karnataka State Natural Disaster Monitoring Centre  
KSPCB  Karnataka State Pollution Control Board  
KSPCDCL  Karnataka Solar Power Development Corporation Limited  
KSRTC  Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation  
KTCP  Karnataka Town and Country Planning  
kVA  kilovolt -ampere  
kW Kilo Watt  
LEED  Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design  
LEZ  Low Emission Zone  
LIFE  Lifestyle for Environment  
LIG Lower Income Group  
LMV  Light Commercial Vehicles  
LPG  Liquefied petroleum gas  
LST Land Surface Temperature  
m Metre 
Max  Maximum  
MERL  Monitoring, Evaluation, Reporting and Learning  
mg/l  Milligram/ Litre 
MIG  Middle Income Group  
Min  Minimum  
MLD  Million Litres per Day 
mm Millimetre  
MMI  Multi Modal Integration  
MMT  Million Metric Ton  
MoEFCC  Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change  
MoPNG  Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
MPC  Metropolitan Planning Committee  
MRF  Material Recovery Facility  
MSME  Micro, Small , and Medium Enterprise  
MSW  Municipal Solid Waste  
MW  Mega Watt  
MwH  Megawatt Hour 
N2O  Nitrous Oxide  
NAMP  National Air Quality Monitoring Programme  
NAPCC  National Action Plan for Climate Change  
NBC  National Building Code  
NBS  Nature -Based Solution  
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    17  
NCAP  National Clean Air Programme  
NCEI  National Center s for Environmental Information  
NDC  Nationally Determined Contribution  
NGO  Non -Governmental Organisation  
NGT  National Green Tribunal  
NIUA  National Institute of Urban Affairs  
NMEEE  National Mission for Enhanced Energy Efficiency  
NMT  Non -Motorised  Transport  
NNE -SSW  North --North -East —South --South -West  
NOx  Nitrogen Oxide  
NRW  Non -Revenue Water  
NSIC  National Small Industries Corporation  
NSM  National Solar Mission  
NSS  Non -Specified Source  
NUHM  National Urban Health Mission  
NULM  National Urban Livelihood Mission  
O3 Ozone  
ORR  Outer Ring Road  
OSHA  Occupational Safety and Health Administration  
PAT  Perform, Achieve and Trade  
PBR  People’s Biodiversity Register  
PBS  Public Bike Sharing  
PCKL  Power Company of Karnataka Limited  
pH Potential of hydrogen  
PM Prime Minister  
PM  Particulate Matter  
PMAY -U Pradhan Mantri  Awas Yojana -Urban  
PMUY  Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yoj ana 
PNG  Piped Natural Gas  
PPAC  Petroleum Planning and Analysis Cell  
pph Persons Per Hectare  
PT Public Transport  
PWD  Public Works Department  
R&D  Research and development  
RCP  Representative Concentration Pathway  
RDF  Refused Derived Fuel  
RE Renewable Energy  
RMP  Revised Master Plan  
rpm  Revolutions Per Minute  
RR Nagar  Raja Rajeshwari Nagar  
RSP  Revised Structure Plan  
RWH  Rainwater  Harvesting  
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    18  
SARI  Severe Acute Respiratory Infection  
SBM  Swachh Bharat Mission  
SBS Sick Building Syndrome  
SCM  Smart Cities Mission  
SCSP  Scheduled Caste Sub -Plan  
SDG  Sustainable Development Goal  
SME  Small and Medium Enterprises  
SO2  Sulphur  Dioxide  
SOP  Standard Operating Procedure  
Sq.m  Square Metres 
STP Software Technology Park  
STP Sewage Treatment Plant  
SWD  Storm -water Drainage Department  
SWM  Solid Waste Management  
T&D  Transmission and Distribution  
T&L  Thunderstorm and Lightning  
TERI  The Energy and Resources Institute  
TG Halli  Thippagondanahalli  
TH Total Hardness  
TK Halli  Thoraikadanahalli  
TOD  Transit -Orient ed Development  
TPA  Tonnes Per Annum  
TPD  Tonnes Per Day 
TPP  Thermal Power Plants  
TSP Tribal Sub -Plan  
UfW  Unaccounted -for Water  
UHI  Urban Heat Island  
UIDF  Urban Infrastructure Development Fund  
ULB  Urban Local Body  
ULEZ  Ultra -Low Emission Zone  
UNFCCC  United Nations Framework on Climate Change Convention  
URDPFI  Urban and Regional Development Plans Formulation and Implementation  
VA Vulnerability Assessment  
VKT  Vehicle Kilometres  Travelled  
VOC  Volatile Organic Compounds  
VRE  Variable Renewable Energy  
VVMP  Voluntary Vehicle Fleet Modernisation Program  
WHO  World Health Organization  
WRD  Water Resource Department  
WRI  World Resources Institute  
WtE  Waste to Energy  
% Percent  
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    19  
°C Degree s Celsius  
µg/m3  microgram s per cubic metre 
  
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    20   
 
Bengaluru, the capital of Karnataka and one of the fastest growing cities in India, holds a 
unique position in the country’s urban landscape. The city is one of the largest attractors of 
talent globally, with a strong innovation and startup ecosystem. Beng aluru, historically known 
as the Garden City of India, has gradually become the Silicon Valley of India, being one of the 
largest hubs of Information Technology companies in the world.  
While the city has been proactive in formulating progressive policies to manage its growth, it 
is not insulated from the perils of growth. The pressure of urbanisation has not only impacted 
the natural resources and ecological networks in the city -region, but its effect can be felt in the 
city’s liveability conditions. At the same time, the growing concern over climate change and its 
impact on cities has added a sense of urgency to our efforts to enhance Brand Bengaluru as 
one of the most liveable and inclu sive cities in the world and a preferred investment 
destination.  
The Government of Karnataka, together with Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP), 
in an effort to tackle these challenges and reiterate its commitment to the shared international 
goal to limit global warming and uphold the Paris Agreement as a member o f the C40 cities, 
is pleased to put forward the first ever Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan (BCAP). 
Developing an actionable roadmap to mitigate and adapt to climate change, and to build better 
resilience, is a priority of the government of Kar nataka, and must be seen as a human 
development agenda. Over the next few years, the BCAP will be implemented as a multi -
sectoral collaborative effort, drawing participation from various departments of the 
Government of Karnataka, civil society and the pri vate sector.  
Launching a roadmap for climate action for Bengaluru is a strategically significant step for the 
state of Karnataka. With 1 in 7 persons in the state living in Bengaluru, and given the city’s 
forward and backward linkages in the state and national economy,  the BCAP is going to 
positively impact not just the citizens of Bengaluru, but many more lives. I am confident that 
Bengaluru will emerge as a lighthouse not only for other cities in Karnataka and India, but as 
a global example of inclusive climate action . 
  

 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    21   
 
As per the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Sixth Assessment Report 
(AR6), with every increment in global warming, regional changes in the mean climate and 
extremes become more widespread and pronounced. Adverse impacts from climate change 
will continue to intensify in future. India’s updated Nationally Determined Contribution 
(NDC) is a milestone in this effort, and seeks to enhance the country’s contributions towards 
strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, as per  the Paris Agreement. 
The Government of Karnataka is committed to being a frontrunner in helping the country 
embark on low -emission and resilient pathways. Cities are the engines of economic growth, 
and it is high time that they take up the mantle. I am ha ppy to see that Bengaluru is already 
championing this effort, with the Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan (BCAP). With 
the launch of the BCAP, it will become one of the few cities in the world, and the third in India, 
to have a global standard Cl imate Action Plan.  
Spearheaded by the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP), the BCAP is Bengaluru’s 
first data -driven, multi -stakeholder collaborative exercise to address its GHG mitigation and 
climate change adaptation challenges. The goals, targets and actions recomme nded by this 
plan provide clear pathways to achieve a net zero and climate -resilient Bengaluru. As it is the 
largest city of Karnataka, its plan is sure to provide a roadmap to other cities in the state to act 
against climate change.  
For any plan to be successful it is imperative that all stakeholders take ownership. The 
successful implementation of the BCAP would require coordination and coherence amongst 
government departments, civil society organisations, NGOs, research organisation s and, most 
importantly, citizens. With every actor playing their part in turning this plan into reality, I am 
optimistic that the city will transform its challenges into opportunities.  
 

 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    22   
Climate change is one of the biggest challenges that cities are grappling with in the 21st 
century, and thus it must be addressed to achieve the mission of sustainable and inclusive 
urban development. With the successful adoption and launch of the Bengaluru Climate Action 
and Resilience Plan (BCAP), Bengaluru can become a model for other cities and towns in 
Karnataka to become climate -progressive.  
Bengaluru is the largest of Karnataka's 10 municipal corporations. Therefore, the scale and 
complexity of the challenges it faces are mammoth. Apart from the Bruhat Bengaluru 
Mahanagara Palike (BBMP), there are multiple departments and agencies responsible  for 
providing different types of services and planning for the city. These include the Bengaluru 
Electricity Supply Company Limited (BESCOM), Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage 
Board (BWSSB), Bengaluru Metropolitan Transport Corporation (BMTC), Bangalore  Metro 
Rail Corporation Limited (BMRCL), Bangalore Development Authority (BDA), and the 
Disaster Management Department. Climate action is an agenda that cuts across sectors. The 
goals, targets, and actions for greenhouse gas mitigation and resilience -build ing set by the 
BCAP have been developed in consultation and consensus with all relevant agencies. It is now 
incumbent on us to deliver on the ambitious targets set by BCAP with the utmost sincerity.  
The Urban Development Department of the Government of Karnataka is committed to 
supporting the BBMP and all other key stakeholder departments and agencies in 
implementing the BCAP with highest level of coordination and coherence. The momentous 
effort put i n preparing the BCAP will only be realised on the ground when all the stakeholders 
working in and for Bengaluru align with each other. I hope this effort will set a precedent for 
other cities in Karnataka and the rest of the country in making cities plan a nd deliver on 
climate action commitments.  
 

 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    23   
Bengaluru, the capital of Karnataka and the fifth largest city in India, is among the handful of 
cities across the globe to decisively declare its commitment to tackle climate change. 
Bengaluru joined the C40 cities network in 2017, and is committed to con tribute its fair share 
to limit warming to 1.5 degrees, while being equally committed to prepare itself to adapt to 
climate change impacts. The city is also the co -lead of the Global Air Quality Network. By 
presenting the Bengaluru Climate Action and Resil ience Plan (BCAP), we reaffirm the city’s 
commitment to fight climate change for Bengaluru’s citizens, for our country and, in the true 
spirit of a 21st century city, for the global community.  
The BCAP is not a mere document, but a firm step towards charting a roadmap for the city - 
informed by data, research, the best available knowledge practices and, most importantly, 
lived experiences. With this plan, Bengaluru has embarked on an ambitious j ourney to reduce 
GHG emissions in line with the commitment given by the Govt of India to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change. Our endeavour will be to achieve these long -term 
emission reduction targets by implementing BCAP actions wit hin the framework of the 
relevant policies of the Govt of India. The BBMP will endeavour to actively pursue the policies 
and to contribute more to arrest the climate change.  
An evaluation of BCAP goals and targets will be done every three years, based on insights 
provided by monitoring exercises described in the previous section. The goals and targets will 
be revised if required based on the evaluation exercise. The entire BCA P will be revisited every 
five years, based on updated evidence and progress on goals set.  
As we adopt and start the implementation of the BCAP, it is important to internalise the plan’s 
intent in letter and spirit, in the policies, processes and practices of planning, managing and 
governing the city. While the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike , along with all the key 
departments of the Government of Karnataka working in and for the city, will lead the 
implementation of the plan from the front, the BCAP can only be a success with participation 
from and partnerships, which include citizens and ci vil society, knowledge institutions, and 
the private sector. With the adoption of the BCAP, Bengaluru takes yet another leap towards 
securing a healthy, safe, and resilient urban future for its citizens.  
I thank C40 Cities and WRI India for their stewardship in developing the BCAP for Bengaluru.  
 

 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    24   
 
 
Bengaluru, the fifth  most populous urban agglomeration  in India, has been a C40 city since 
2017, committing to accelerated climate action as a part of C40’s Leadership Standards. 
Integral to this, Bengaluru has now published its Climate Action Plan (BCAP) committing to 
playing its fair role in reducing carbon  emissions, thereby setting a roadmap to becoming 
carbon neutral by 2050 aligned with the Paris Agreement and also contributing to India’s 
NDCs and the target of carbon neutrality by 2070.  
The Bengaluru Climate Action Plan is data -driven based on a GHG inventory of 2019 -2020, 
that sets clear yet achievable targets, of 16% by 2030, 26% by 2040 and 56% by 2050 and 
further endeavours to work towards achieving net zero by 2050 in line with the e xtended 
scenario (34% by 2030, 58% by 2040, and 91% reduction by 2050). This is an important 
milestone for Bengaluru and an inspiration for cities in the Global South, leading the way in 
demonstrating how political commitment and leadership bringing divers e stakeholders in the 
discussions, can result in an ambitious yet implementable climate action plan.  
 A critical component of the BCAP is to build resilience to immediate and future climate risks 
and address inclusive climate actions by putting health and economic recovery by creating jobs 
at the forefront. The BCAP has been developed on consensus, collab oration and coherence 
with national, state and city policies and actions. The Urban Development Department, GoK 
and Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP), with strategic support from WRI India 
and C40 Cities, have led from the front on many of these di scussions and helped frame the key 
priorities that can enable this transition. We look forward to continuing our engagement with 
BBMP along with the State Government and other institutions in the implementation and 
delivery of targets set out to create a R esilient and Liveable Bengaluru.  
  

 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    25   
 
 
Bengaluru, one of the world’s largest innovation hubs, and fastest growing economies, is a 
favoured destination for investors and talent alike. In the phase of pandemic recovery, the city 
has been through a lot, given the hectic pace of growth and the cont inuous onslaught of 
extreme climate events. In this context, the Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan 
(BCAP) provides a decisive and inclusive stance on climate action, training its lens on fore -
fronting interconnected actions that are beneficial f or people, nature and climate.  
The BCAP is unprecedented because the solutions it suggests, to address Bengaluru’s 
vulnerabilities and strengthen climate resilient growth, are highly data and evidence -based. 
Furthermore, it also takes into account ground realities based on multiple deli berations with 
citizens and public agencies.  
The Plan sets clear goals, targets, and actions across seven key sectors: Energy and buildings, 
transport, solid waste, water and wastewater, air quality, urban planning, greening and 
biodiversity, and disaster resilience. The recommendations offered in th e Plan span 
institutional mechanisms and regulations, to infrastructure development, finance and 
capacity. The BCAP is a valuable opportunity to drive coherence across sectors and agencies 
towards delivering outcomes and impact on the ground. The plan inte rfaces with multiple 
disciplines and is therefore, well  equipped to inform policy and complementary action by a 
varied range of stakeholders to shape a liveable and thriving city.  
As we focus on reducing emissions, inequities and restoring nature, there are reasons for 
optimism, as Bengaluru is only the third city in India with a climate action plan adhering to 
global standards and will play a pivotal role in India’s transition towa rds climate proofing its 
citizens and economy.  
Climate -resilient, sustainable, well -planned urban development, reduces inequality, improves 
inclusion, and enables better quality of life, while respecting planetary boundaries. WRI India 
looks forward to supporting Bengaluru in achieving its goal of purs uing low -carbon, just, 
equitable and resilient growth, and safeguarding the future of Bengalureans through collective 
climate -positive actions.  
 

 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    26  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS   
 
We sincerely thank the C40 Cities team for giving us the opportunity and guiding the city 
throughout the process of preparing the Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan 
(BCAP). We express our gratitude to WRI India for supporting the Bruhat Bengaluru  
Mahanagara Palike as a knowledge partner in preparing the BCAP since its inception and 
throughout its development and until the final approval stage. We thank all the stakeholder 
agencies, especially the nodal officers, who supported us with data, time, r esources and 
suggestions. We appreciate the support received from all the officials from BBMP, including 
its zonal and ward offices, who participated in the development of the BCAP. We thank all the 
experts, practitioners, and members of academia and civil  society for their valuable time in 
making the preparation of the BCAP a multi -stakeholder consultative exercise. We express our 
gratitude to all the advisors and reviewers from C40 Cities and WRI India. Specifically, we 
would like to thank all the individ uals, authors, the support teams and organisations listed 
below, for their unconditional support and contributions to the BCAP.  
Government of Karnataka  
Smt. Vandita Sharma, IAS, Chief Secretary  
Shri Rakesh Singh, IAS, Additional Chief Secretary to Government, Urban Development 
Department  
 
Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike  
Shri Tushar Giri Nath, IAS, Chief Commissioner  
Dr. Harish Kumar K, IAS, Special Commissioner -Administration and Solid Waste 
Management  
Shri Basavaraj Kabade, Chief General Manager & Chief Engineer, BSWML; Nodal Officer of 
BCAP from BBMP  
Dr. Rohini Balasubramanian, Nodal Officer (formerly associated)  
 
WRI India  
Project Coordinator  
Jaya Dhindaw, Director, WRI India Ross Center  and Executive Program Director, 
Sustainable Cities  
 
Authors  
Shrimoyee Bhattacharya, Program Head - Urban Development,  
Praseeda Mukundan,  Senior Program Research Associate  - Urban Development  
Nanduri Prashanti,  Senior  Program  Research Associate – Urban Development  
Chetan Venkataramana Naika, Senior Program Associate - Urban Development  
Sruthi Subbanna,  Senior Program Research Associate - Urban Development  
Bhanu Khanna, Program Manager  - Geo Analytics  
Radha  Chanchani,  Senior Manager - Urban Development  
Dr. Priya Narayanan, Senior Program Manager - Urban Development  
Abhimanyu S, Program Associate - Geo Analytics  
Linda Regi,  Program Associate - Geo Analytics  
Raj Bhagat Palanichamy,  Senior Program Manager - Geo Analytics  
 
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    27   
 
Contributors  
Deepak Krishnan, Deputy  Program  Director - Energy  
Sumedha Malaviya, Program Head  - Energy  
Sahana Goswami, Senior Program Manager – Urban Water Resilience  
Rohan Rao, Program Lead - Electric Mobility  
Sudeept Maiti, Associate Program Director – Transport (formerly associated)  
Aloke Mukherjee, Manager - Transport  
Bhavay Sharma, Senior Program Manager - Air Quality  
Ajay Nagpure, Director - Air Quality (formerly associated)  
Bina Shetty, Program Head - Spatial Data and Data Analytics  
Jyoti, Senior Program Associate - Geo Analytics  
Harsha K, Junior Program Associate - Geo Analytics  
Aditya Khare, Program Associate - Geo Analytics  
Sumedha Jain, Program Manager - Urban Development  
 
Design & Communications  
Rama Thoopal, Program Communications Lead  
Nileena S, Senior Communications Associate - Geo Analytics  
Safia Zahid, Communications Manager  
Abhinand Pulijala, Senior Program Communications Associate - Geo Analytics  
Anhad Imaan, Senior Program Communications Associate  
 
 
C40 Cities  
Shruti Narayan, Regional Director for South and West Asia Region  
Benjamin John, City  Advisor, Chennai and Bengaluru  
Akshatha Venkatesha,  Inclusive Climate Action City  Adviser, Bengaluru  
Max Jamieson,  Head of Climate Action Planning  
Ryan Green,  Senior Technical Manager, Climate Action Planning  
Siyasanga Sauka, Head of Adaptation Planning  
Kirsty Griffin,  Senior Technical Manager, Adaptation Planning  
Zoe Chafe, Technical Lead, Air Quality  
Helen Ho,  Programme  Manager, Air Quality Technical Assistance  
Toby Coombes,  Project Manager, Air Quality Policy and Analysis  
Vivian Pun, Senior Technical  Advisor, Air Quality and Health  
Surya Srinivas Boddu,  Former Technical  Advisor  Air Quality  
 
 
 
Copy edited and proofed by Rama Thoopal,  Uma Asher and Ateendriya Gupta  
  
 
  
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    28   
List of stakeholder departments/agencies consulted  
Bangalore Development Authority (BDA)  
Bangalore Electricity Supply Company Limited (BESCOM)  
Bangalore Water Supply & Sewerage Board (BWSSB)  
Bengaluru Metro Rail Corporation Limited (BMRCL)  
Bengaluru City Police  
Bengaluru Solid Waste Management Limited (BSWML)  
Bengaluru Traffic Police department  
Bengaluru  Metropolitan  Transport Corporation (BMTC)  
Central Ground Water Board (CGWB)  
Commissionerate of health and family welfare  
Department of Industries and Commerce  
Directorate of Urban Land Transport (DULT)  
District Disaster Management Authority (under Revenue Department)   
Environmental Management & Policy Research Institute (EMPRI)  
GAIL (India) Limited   
Ground Water Directorate (GWD)  
India Meteorological Department (IMD)  
Indian Institute of Science (IISc)  
Karnataka Biodiversity Board  
Karnataka Forest Department  
Karnataka Power Corporation Limited (KPCL)   
Karnataka Power Transmission Corporation Limited (KPTCL)  
Karnataka Renewable Energy Development Limited (KREDL)  
Karnataka Solar Power Development Corporation Limited (KSPDCL)  
Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB)   
Karnataka State Remote Sensing Applications Centre (KSRSAC)  
Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation (KSRTC)  
Karnataka State  Natural Disaster Monitoring Centre (KSNDMC)  
Karnataka Transport Department  
MSME Development Institute (DI)  
Petroleum Planning and Analysis Cell (PPAC)  
Power Company of Karnataka Limited (PCKL)  
Rail Infrastructure Development Company (Karnataka) Limited (KRIDE)  
The Energy & Resources Institute (TERI)  
Urban Development Department   
Water Resource Department (WRD)  
 
 
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    29  VISION: TOWARDS A NET ZERO AND CLIMATE -RESILIENT  
BENGALURU  
‘Urban systems are critical for achieving deep emissions reductions and advancing climate -resilient 
development, particularly when this involves integrated planning that incorporates physical, natural and 
social infrastructure  (high confidence) .’ 
Synthesis Report of the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report (AR6), 2023  
 
The Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan (BCAP) foregrounds human wellbeing in 
the city’s fight against climate change through its commitment to tackle contributors and 
impact of climate change with equal priority, both of which have profound conse quence on 
shaping Bengaluru’s transition to a future that is just, resilient, inclusive and equitable.  
BCAP acknowledges that the window of opportunity for securing a livable future for Bengaluru 
is rapidly closing and the choices we make today will determine the choices we leave for future 
citizens of Bengaluru. BCAP sets ambitious goals for mitigating GHG  emissions (in line with 
the commitment given by the Govt of India to the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change) and enhance Bengaluru’s resilience by propelling adjustments in ecological, 
social or economic systems of the city in response to risks posed by climate change.  
BCAP acknowledges the 2070 net zero goal set by India's Nationally Determined 
Contributions. Bengaluru, as the hub of innovation and start -ups, with access to advanced 
knowledge and resources, and home to a thriving civil society, intends to lead the way b y 
setting more ambitious targets and implementing innovative solutions to help achieve India's 
declared climate goals, and at the same time become an incubator of climate solutions which 
could be replicated by other cities.  
Enshrining a three -pronged priority of human wellbeing, natural protection and economic 
growth, the pathways for achieving climate goals for the city are based on the following three 
pillars of success:   
Consensus:  Build informed conversation among all actors as a continuous process during 
preparation and implementation of BCAP and beyond.  
Collaboration: Catalyse radical partnerships with both state and non -state stakeholders for 
implementation of actions  
Coherence:  Ensure interdependencies of policies, plans, processes and practices are well -
addressed to ensure sustainability of actions.  
We believe that BCAP will provide a much -needed climate -progressive roadmap for 
Bengaluru.  
 
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |    30    

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   31  
1 INTRODUCTION  
 
Bengaluru (also known as Bangalore)  is the fifth most populous urban agglomeration in India , 
and one of the fastest -growing metropolises1 (Census 2011) . It is the capital and the primate 
city of the state of Karnataka, accommodating about 39% of the total urban population of the 
state. Situated approximately 920 metres (m) above mean sea level in the Cauvery  and 
Ponnaiyar  (also known as Dakshin Pinakini) river basin, Bengaluru is bestowed with rich 
biodiversity and natural resources. Thanks  to an intrinsic network of lakes  (locally referred to 
as tanks) , natural drainage channels , and green spaces, Bengaluru  is known as the Garden City 
of India. Primarily a cantonment town during the colonial period, the city has gradually 
transformed into a major economic centre of the country, attracting people  and businesses 
from all over India and across the world. The city’s manufactur ing-based economy in the post -
Independence period was overtaken by strong tertiary/service sector growth in the 1990s, led 
by the growth of the IT sector. Since then, Bengaluru has also come to be  known as the Silicon  
Valley of India, producing the largest share of India’s IT jobs and exports. A thriving centre  of 
knowledge and innovation, Bengaluru has also emerged as a leading start -up hub in recent 
years.  In 2019 -20, B engaluru  Urban District  (BUD)  contributed 36% of Karnataka’s Gross 
State Domestic Produ ct (P. Department 2021) . 
Bengaluru’s e conomic growth was accompanied by the growth of the population and physical 
expansion. The  city has grown rapidly since the 1990 s, with  almost a three -fold expansion of 
the municipal corporation area in 2007. The jurisdiction of the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara 
Palike (BBMP), the municipal corporation of the city, covers an area of about 713 sq.  km., and 
accommodat ed 8.5 million people  in 2011. The estimated population of BBMP was 
approximately 10 million in 2019. The BBMP area could be seen as a cumulati on of three broad 
area categories: the city core (the erstwhile municipal corpo ration area), areas under eight 
smaller municipalities that were merged with the erstwhile municipal corporation to form 
BBMP in 2005, and 110 villages that were adjoining the city core before the formation of BBMP 
and are now part of BBMP  in its current avatar . As o f 2021, the total area under BBMP is 
divided into eight zones and 198 wards (BBMP now has 2 25 wards after a delimitation exercise 
was carried out in 202 3).  
While the expansion of the city’s municipal boundary  created room to accommodat e its  
growing population and economic activities, it also propelled the need for extending adequate 
urban infrastructure and services to the peripheries of the city. More importantly, the rapid 
growth over the past two decades has led  to urban sprawl, loss of green cover , and 
deteriorating  liveability  conditions , negatively impacting Bengaluru’s attractiveness as an 
investment destination . This has  underscored the need  for balancing the city’s growth 
aspirations and liveability  conditions with be tter evidence -based urban planning and 
management practices. Moreover, the incre asing frequency of hazards being experienced by 
Bengaluru , as a combined result of extreme weather events and lack of preparedness to 
 
1 According to the World Population Review, Bengaluru  urban agglomeration (which includes Bengaluru city and 
adjoining outgrowths)  has a population of 18 million in 2023  (Review 2023)  (Nations 2018)  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   32  
manage their impacts , makes it imperative for the city to reimagine its future through the lens 
of climate change .2 
Cities are increasingly being put at the centr e stage of climate discussions on two counts : one , 
they are  major emitters of GHG s, accounting for almost 75% of  global CO2 emission s (UNEP 
2017) , and two , cities face  increased risk from climate change impacts due to the concentration 
of population  and econom ic activities,  plausibly leading to sever e loss and damage  (IPCC 6th 
Assessment Report noted observed high negative impact on cities due to climate change) . 
Addressing these two aspects  of climate change has multiple other co -benefits for cities such 
as better liveability , reduced economic burden on the city and citizens, improved air quality 
and public health, greater opportunity for green jobs and so on.  Bengaluru has been 
address ing many of these challenges through different initiatives. The Climate Action and 
Resilience Plan gives Bengaluru an opportunity to intensify and coordinate  its efforts to plan 
and manage the perils of rapid urban growth in a way that is climate -aware and alig ned to the 
global climate agenda as well as India’s Nationally Determined Contributions  (NDCs)3.  
Bengaluru joined  the C40 cities network in 2017. It is also the co -lead of the Global Air Quality 
Network and a signatory to Deadline 20204 set by and for the C40 cities network. Deadline 
2020  was a call for all c40 cities to chalk out a  roadmap by 2020 to d eliver the  Paris 
Agreement5, i.e., to limit the global temperature rise to 1.5 degrees , with an eye  to reduce  GHG 
emission s by 2030 , and neutrality by 2050 . The BBMP  started the preparation of the 
Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan  (BCAP) in August 2021 , in partnership with 
C40 cities and WRI India. The primary aim of the BCAP  is three -fold:  one, to find pathways 
with tangible targets for the mitigation6 of GHG s, which are the main contributors to climate 
change; two, to identify strategies for  adaptation7 and resilience -building8 to climate change 
impacts at the city level ; and three, to mainstream climate action in the city’s core activities 
and de velop suitable mechanisms for tracking progress on  identified actions and pathways . 
The goals and targets for  implementing mitigation and adaptation pathways  take cogn isance 
of India’s commitments on international platforms  (such as the revised Nationally 
Determined Contributions ), emerging national and sub -national policy aspirations and 
Karnataka’s own ambitions for acting on climate change as put forward  by the Karnataka State 
Action Plan for Climate Change  2021 .  
 
2 Climate change is defined as per the IPCC 5th Assessment Report . Refer to the glossary for the definition .  
3 India released its first ever NDCs in 2015 , followed by a n updated version released in August 2022.  The updated 
NDC s aims to achieve net -zero emissions  by 20 70 (UNFCCC 2022a) . 
4 Deadline 2020 is the first significant ro admap for achieving the Paris Agreement, outlining the pace, scale , and 
priorit isation  of action needed by C40 member cities  (Cities 2016) . 
5 The Paris Agreement is a legally binding international treaty on climate change. It was adopted by 196 Parties at 
the UN Climate Change Conference (COP21) in Paris, France, on 12 December 2015. It entered into force on 4 
November 2016.  Its overarching goal is to hold ‘the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2°C 
above pre -industrial levels ’ and pursue efforts ‘to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre -industrial 
levels ’ (UN Climate change 2019) . 
6 Mitigation generally  refers to  efforts to reduce or prevent emission of greenhouse gases. Refer to the glossary for 
the definition of mitigation  as per IPCC 5th Assessment Report  
7 Adaptation generally refers to changes in processes, practices , and structures to moderate potential damages or 
to benefit from opportunities associated with climate change . Refer to the glossary for the definition  of adaptation  
as per IPCC 5th Assessment Report.  
8 Resilience generally refers to the capacity or ability to anticipate and cope with shocks, and to recover from 
climate change  impacts . Refer to the glossary for the definition of resilience  as per IPCC 5th Assessment Report.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   33  
Spanning over more than a year, the preparation of the BCAP was a multi -sectoral and multi -
stakeholder initiative. The objective was to arrive at a plan of action that is backed by science 
and evidence, grounded in reality, and owned by agencies across sectors as well as  the citizens 
of Bengaluru.   
1.1 Approach and key steps  
The overarching approach to the preparation of the BCAP was anchored to  the C40 Cities 
Climate Action Planning framework essentially embedded in commitment, evidence , and 
action -based planning. This framework is primarily built around the following four 
components:  
a) Emission reduction/neutrality:  Create a GHG  emission s baseline for the city , and 
develop a pathway  to inform the strategies and targets that will be needed  to accelerate 
the delivery of an emission -neutral city by 2050, with an ambitious interim target . 
b) Climate change risk and vulnerability reduction:  Conduct a Climate Change  
Risk and Vulnerability Assessment  (CCRA -VA) for the city and d emonstrate how the 
city will adapt and improve its resilience to the climate hazards that may impact the 
city now and in future climate change scenarios . 
c) Inclusivity and benefits:  Engage with the community to inform the plan, outline 
the social, environmental , and economic benefits expected from implementing the 
plan ; and establish ways to ensure equitable distribution of these benefits to the city’s 
population . 
d) Governance and collaboration:  Outline the city’s governance , responsibilities,  
power s and capacity, and identify the partners who need to be engaged in order to 
accelerate the delivery of mitigation targets and resilience goals . 
The GHG inventory and CCRA -VA form the basis of BCAP , both of which offer a data -driven 
scientific evidence base for the city, created with  multi -stakeholder  contribution s. 
The approach to analytics, action framing and priorit isation in the BCAP enshrine three key 
tenets of a thriving and sustainable city, namely , human well-being , natural protection , and 
economic growth . This also reflects the BCAP’s alignment to the Sustainable Development 
Goals  (SDGs) , especially SDG -11, which aims to make cities and urban areas inclusive, safe 
and resilient, and SDG -13, which calls for urgent action to combat climate change and its 
impacts. These are addressed at the cross -section of other SDGs that focus on critical aspec ts 
of access to basic services and amenities and protection of ecological systems.  
A summary of this approach is illustrated  in Figure 1 below.  
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   34  
Figure 1 Approach to the preparation of the BCAP  
 
Source: WRI India and C40 Cities  
 
It is important to acknowledge that cities in India are subject to multiple planning 
interventions , and Bengaluru is no exception. The city’s spatial growth , land use , and 
development are largely guided by the Master Plan (the Revised Master Plan for Bangalore -
2015) , which is a statutory planning instrument. On the other hand, planning for 
infrastructure and amenities creation, maintenance , and service delivery are guided by sector -
specific plans , progra mmes or  schemes  conceived by agencies with the relevan t mandate. 
Besides , there are policies and acts pertaining to each of these sectors and elements. The 
intended objective of the BCAP is to add a climate lens to all the existing and upcoming sectoral 
and institutional efforts in a manner that is best informed by available evidence and 
knowledge. Being cogn isant of this reality, efforts have been made to align or link the climate 
actions proposed under the BCAP to sectors and agencies that are mandated to deliver a 
certain agenda. Therefore, actions proposed under BCAP have been aligned to seven key 
sectors responsible for delivering on either the mitigation and/ or the adaptation/ resilience -
building objective s of the BCAP. These sectors are : Energy and buildings; 
Transport ation ; Solid waste; Air quality ; Water , wastewater , stormwater; Urban 
planning, greening and biodiversity; and Disaster management  (refer  to Figure 2). 
Notably, the actions under these sectors will have both forward and backward linkages , and 
cascading effects on other important social sectors , such as economic development and 
employment, health, and education  and so on . 
  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   35  
Figure 2 Sectoral alignment of BCAP for action framing  
 
Source: As identified by BBMP with the technical support of WRI India   
 
Key stages in  the preparation of the BCAP are summar ised in Figure 3. 
Figure 3 Key milestones in  BCAP preparation  
 
Source: WRI India  
 
This report adheres to the IPCC’s Fifth and Sixth Assessment Report (AR5 and AR6)  (IPCC 
2022)  for all key concepts used. The d etailed methodologies and tools used for each stage are 
discussed in  the respective chapters. Broadly, the GHG inventory for the city has been 
developed adhering to the Global Protocol for Community -scale Greenhouse Gas Emission 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   36  
Inventories (also referred to as GPC) .9 For the assessment of risk from climate -induced 
hazards, the study used the Climate Change Risk Assessment (CCRA) framework  (C40 Cities 
2018) , developed by C40 , and a Climate Hazard Vulnerability Assessment ( CHVA)10 
Framework , developed by WRI  India . 
1.2 Encouraging  participation  in the formulation of the BCAP  
The entire process of prepar ing the  BCAP was informed by a series of consultations. A three -
pronged consultation process was adopted to seek inputs from three different stakeholder 
groups , as illustrated in Figure 4. The s ection below gives detail ed information about each of 
these stakeholder consultations . 
Figure 4 Three -pronged approach for stakeholder consultations  
 
Source: As identified by BBMP with technical support of WRI India  
 
Consultations with government departments and parastatal agencies  
These consultations were conducted with government departments and parastatal agencies 
throughout the BCAP preparation process. This was carried out through individual meetings 
as well as sector -wise inter -departmental convening to seek inputs  and, suggestions a s well as  
build consensus on sector -wise goals and targets, action tracks, priorities , and responsibilities. 
These were held for all the seven priority sectors identified for BCAP, where collectively more 
 
9 GPC is a GHG Protocol standard developed by C40, World Resources Institute and ICLEI - Local Governments 
for Sustainability. This is available as a dashboard for C40 cities.  Refer to the glossary for details.  
10 Details of WRI’s Vulnerability Assessment framework can be found in the CCRA report . 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   37  
than 40 departments/agencies were consulted. For t he list of departments consulted , see  
Annexure  A.  
Consultations with academia , experts , and practitioners  
A series of seven consultative sessions  were held  with experts and representatives from 
academia, think -tanks and NGOs, and practitioners , covering different sectors such as energy 
and green buildings, transport, air quality, solid waste, water and wastewater, urban planning 
and disaster resilience, green cover, and biodiversity. These sessions were conducted virtually 
in webinar  format.  
The discussions across sessions were framed against the following broad guiding questions, 
on which inputs were sought from sector -specific experts:  
• What are the strategic opportunities for Bengaluru in mitigation and adaptation  that 
are ambitious, yet feasible to pursue in the short and long term?  
• What are the challenges in enabling an inclusive climate action lens in all sectoral and 
developmental agenda s in Bengaluru?  
• What type of governance arrangements are required for the successful adoption and 
implementation of the Climate Action Plan with respect to a) institutions and 
capacities, b) plans and policies, and c) processes and platforms?  
A summary of key take -aways from this round of consultation can be foun d here . The l ist of 
participants in the expert consultation is placed at Annex ure A. 
Consultations at zon al level s 
These consultations were held at two levels to capture inputs from citizen groups:  
1. Zone-level sensit isation workshops ; and   
2. Pilot ward committee meetings , where the BCAP agenda was introduced .  
 
Zone-level sensit isation workshops  
The zone-level workshops were conducted to sensit ise BBMP officials about the  BCAP , and to 
train them on how to capture inputs and feedback from ward committees and citizen groups . 
A BCAP  Consultation Toolkit  was prepared for this purpose , which was disseminated during 
these workshops. The objective of this bi -lingual toolkit was to facilitate ward -level 
consultations with diverse stakeholder groups. The toolkit has five sections as follows:  
 
• Section A: Instruction for conducting consultations using the toolkit  
• Section B: Posters on the BCAP  
• Section C: Format for capturing feedback and suggestions  
• Section D: A video explainin g the  BCAP  and about the consultation process  
• Section E: Frequently Asked Question s (FAQs)  
The toolkit can be found  here . 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   38  
 
These sensit isation workshops were conducted for all eight zones of Bengaluru in December 
2022. The participants in these training sessions were ward -level zonal officers, supervisors, 
Assistant Executive Engineers, Junior Health Inspectors, Executive Engineers , and Joint 
Commissioners.  
Pilot ward committee meetings , where BCAP agenda was introduced  
As a start, the BCAP was introduced in three ward committee meetings in different parts of 
the city (Banashankari Temple [South zone ], HSR Layout  [Bommanahalli zone ], and 
Mathikere [West zone ]). The objective was to sensit ise the ward committee m embers on the 
need for and intent of the BCAP, capture ground realities of climate change impacts faced 
locally by different groups, identify implementation opportunities and bottlenecks in locally 
led climate actions, and understand citizen priorities for mitigation and adaptation  actions. 
The responses obtained from these wards provided insights to the BCAP team, which were 
incorporated in to the action plan.  
It is to be noted that this was a beginning , and similar consultations will be conducted in all 
ward committees as the BCAP goes for implementation.  
1.3 Addressing  inclusivity and equity  in the BCAP   
Climate change is inextricably linked to the challenges of eradicating poverty and creating a 
more equal worl d (Cities 2018a)  Hence, it is impossible to tackle climate change without 
tackling inequality and vice -versa. This cannot be achieved by pushing sectoral priorities 
solely. India is committed to the goals of the Paris Agreement, whereby it strives to reduce 
climate risk, a lleviate poverty, build shared prosperity, and promote sustainable development. 
There is a need for Inclusive Climate Action Planning (ICAP) that facilitate s local governments 
to assess climate -related risk and identify actions that are consistent with th e country’s climate 
goals. Inclusivity in climate action planning can be achieved by ensuring (Cities 2018a) : 
• Inclusivity of the process : Engagement with a  wide range of communities and 
stakeholders.  
• Inclusivity of the policy : Fairness and accessibility in design and delivery . 
• Inclusivity of the impact : Wider benefits of action as equitably distributed as possible . 
The BCAP team has adopted the above throughout the CAP preparation process to integrate 
inclusivity and equity.  
The BCAP integrates co -benefits for Bengaluru’s  residents, such as improving urban health 
and well -being, increasing economic prosperity, ensuring equitable access to resources, 
promoting education  and, skill development , and ensuring resilience to climate hazards.  All 
actions  that are a part of the BCAP  (presented in detail in Chapter 5) were assessed using the 
action analysis database , in order to understand the ir inclusivity  and equity implications. 
Vulnerable groups, such as women, the elderly, persons with disabilities, children, low -income 
communities, and informal communities (residents and workers) were mapped in the 
vulnerability assessment , and specific mitigation and adaptation actions have been suggested. 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   39  
Lastly, the planning process has been highly consultative, and has integrated feedback from 
various stakeholders within the government  and civil society groups.  
For further details on promoting inclusivity in climate action, please refer to Chapter 5, Section 
5.4. 
1.4 Aligning BCAP with global, national, and sub -national planning goals  
The BCAP is aligned to the goals set at higher levels of planning and governance , to leverage 
favourable policy environments, align with funding and financing mechanisms, and ensure 
coherent reporting mechanism s across common climate and environment protection goals. 
The BCAP is informed by India’s updated  Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC s), and 
the emission mitigation pathways  developed under this are informed by national -level policies 
and long -term vision documents such as India’s long -term low -carbon development (UNFCCC 
2022b)  by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change  (MoEFCC ). 
Multiple efforts and initiatives have also been taken up at the n ational , state and city level s, in 
the form of sectoral plans, policies, program mes, targets , and schemes. Table 111 illustrates 
examples of the major policies at national and sub -national levels  referred for the BCAP.  City-
level guiding policies and plans considered are mentioned in respective sector -specific 
discussions in chapter 2.  
Table 1: Indicative examples of policies and frameworks considered for preparation of  the BCAP  
National -level guiding policies, plans , and frameworks  
• National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) , Climate Smart Cities Assessment 
Framework, National Mission on Sustainable Habitat  
• National Solar Mission , National Renewable  Energy Policy  
• National Urban Transport Policy (NUTP) , Climate Smart Cities, Faster Adoption and 
Manufacturing of Electric Vehicles in India – Phase II (FAME II)  
• Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 , Swachh  Bharat Mission  
• National Clean Air Program (NCAP)  
• National Water Policy 2012 , National Water Mission   
• National Mission for Green India, Urban and Regional Development Plans Formulation 
and Implementation ( URDPFI ) Guidelines  
• National Disaster Management Policy  
Sub -national  guiding policies, plans, programme s, and frameworks  
• Karnataka State Action Plan on Climate Change (SAPCC)  
• Karnataka Renewable Energy Policy, Karnataka State Building Bye -Laws  
• Karnataka Energy Conservation and Building Code (K -ECBC)  
• Karnataka State Urban Solid Waste Management (SWM) Policy  – 2020  
• Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) regulations, Graded Response Action 
Plan (GRAP)  
• Karnataka State Water Policy  
 
11 This is an indicative list and not an exhaustive list. Refer to specific sector -related section s for more details.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   40  
• Bangalore Development Authority (BDA) Act, Karnataka State Housing Policy  
• Karnataka State Disaster Management Plan  
 
BCAP provide an enabling climate lens to sectoral activities and the development agenda being 
taken up for the city , so that climate action is integrated right from the beginning in the plans, 
program mes and projects for the city, and not as an afterthought . This is done by setting 
strategic action paths aligned to these initiatives at different levels (detailed in Chapter 5) , thus 
ensuring coherence across programmatic outcome targets.  
1.5 Scope, limitations,  and exclusions  
BCAP Jurisdiction : The area under  the BBMP boundary has been considered as the plan 
boundary. All action recommendations pertain to this jurisdiction . The actions, though limited  
to the BBMP area, were suitably informed by the existing and projected situation over the 
larger region within which Bengaluru is located, so as to ensure that impacts of macro -climatic 
variables on the city are duly  accounted for  (e.g., analysis pertaining to Representative 
Concentration Pathway scenarios  were considered for  the Cauvery  and Ponnaiyar river  
basin s). It is to be noted that the study considered  the erstwhile 198 wards of  the BBMP for 
analytical exercises. This is because the BBMP ward delimitation exercise was carried out only 
during the latter  part  of 2022 , when  the preparation of the BCAP had reached an advanced 
stage, and no recalibrated data on demographic and socio -economic parameters was available 
for the new 2 25 wards.  Nevertheless, t he overarching findings , action recommendations , and 
outcomes  do not change , and they apply at the city and zonal level s as is . 
Base year : The BCAP has adopted 2019 as the base year for the GHG inventory , as well as for 
all other analys es, wherever feasible. This is to ensure that the study considers an accurate 
account  of the present situation while avoiding any externalities that might have taken place 
due to  the COVID -19 pandemic between 2020  and 20 22.  
Horizon year : The final horizon year for the BCAP is 2050, while 2030 and 2040 ha ve been 
adopted as interim horizon periods for projections.  
Data sources : The data used for BCAP preparation were primarily sourced from respective 
government departments, parastatal agencies and secondary literature. No primary survey 
was conducted for the purpose of this study. For certain parameters, the study used the 2011 
Census of India data. The u navailability of Census data beyond 2011 remained a challenge. 
The p opulation of the BBMP area for the base year (2019) has been estimated based on 
historic al trends in the absence of Census or any other primary survey data.  
GHG emission s inventory and pathways analysis : The BCAP adhered to the BASIC12 scope 
of the GPC protocol for reporting GHG emissions covering three sectors: energy and buildings, 
 
12 The BASIC scope of the GHG inventory  includes emissions from three sector s: stationary energy, transport, and 
waste , with specific scopes for each. For more information , refer to Section 2.3 of this report . 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   41  
transport , and waste. Sectors such as industrial production and agriculture were excluded 
from the inventory and pathways analysis.  
1.6 How to read this report  
The BCAP report is structured in seven chapters , including the introduction (Chapter   1: this 
chapter). Chapter  2 presents Bengaluru’s city context and the status of sectors . Chapter  3 is 
primarily focused on the evidence baseline created for the city , i.e.,  GHG emission s inventory  
and climate change risks and vulnerabilit y assessment13. This is followed by a description of 
pathways, targets and strategies to be adopted by Bengaluru contributi ng to a fair -share 1.5°C 
warming scenario in Chapter  4. After t his is a description of identified goals  and actions for all 
seven sectors in Chapter  5. Chapter  6 presents the governance and institutional structure 
proposed for implementation of the BCAP , followed by a framework for monitoring progress 
in Chapter  7.  
 
  
 
13 Refer to the report on Climate Change Risk and Vulnerability Assessment for Bengaluru  for details .  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   42  
 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   43  
2 BENGALURU CITY CONTEXT  AND SECTORAL ASSESS MENTS  
2.1 City context  
Apart from being  the administrative capital of the southern state of Karnataka, Bengaluru  is 
also the commercial and industrial capital of the state in many ways. The city has always had 
a historical significance. Founded in 1537, Bengaluru ( whose name was changed from the 
anglic ised ‘Bangalore’ in 2014), has evolve d from a small native township and trading centre  
in the 18th century, to South India’s largest British civil and military station in the 19th 
century, to India’s premier science and technology hub in the 20th century, now competing at 
the global level. Following  India’s  Independence from British rule in 1947, the city was 
retained as the capital and administrative centre  of the new, enlarged State of Mysore 
(renamed ‘Karnataka’ in 1973). Starting with mechan ised textile production and other 
manufacturing activit ies, the wheels of industrial isation gained momentum from  the 1940s to 
the 1960s, with the establishment of many large, nation -building, public sector undertakings 
in the city. Simultaneously , the defence  base also expanded, and Bengaluru became the heart 
of the Indian aviation industry. The other significant development during this period was the 
emergence of several science, technology, and R&D institutions in the city. Gradually, it also 
grew into a prime centre  for education and healthcare, while trade and commercial activity 
flourished. This favo urable mix of science, research , and industry – combined with the 
conveniences of a modern, cosmopolitan city and an agreeable climate, provided the perfect 
setting for the next phase of growth. The 1990s and 2000s saw a major technology boom, with 
Bengaluru spearheading the greatest I T and biotechnology revolutions India  had witnessed. 
The city’s economy is diversified across hi -tech service sectors, defence  and aviation, 
automobile, engineering, textiles/garments , and floriculture , each contributing a significant 
share  in the city’s e conomic outputs . 
Figure 5: Geographical location and relevant administrative jurisdictions  for Bengaluru and its 
adjoining area  
Source: WRI India analysis using Census 2011; BBMP; BMRDA, Government of Karnataka  
 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   44  
Bengaluru is located in the southe ast of Karnataka  (see Figure 5). The municipal corporation 
area  span s 713 sq.  km. and, as per the 2011 Census , housed  a population of 84 ,43,675 (8.43 
million ). Analysis  done for this study  estimate s a population of  101,76,238 (10.17 million ) in 
2019 , residing in the BBMP jurisdiction . A m ajor share of Karnataka’s urban population 
resides in Bengaluru , and  36% of the state’s urban population  lives  in the BBMP area  (Census 
2011) , resulting in Bengaluru -centric urban isation  in the state . Figure 6 depicts the population 
growth in Bengaluru  from 1991 to 201 1, showing a 95% increase in population over the t wo 
decades . The projections for population growth are based on data from the Census Handbook , 
2011 , and a report provided by  the Japan International Cooperative Agency (JICA 2017) . JICA 
outlines  three scenarios for population growth rates: high growth, medium growth, and low 
growth. For the  BCAP,  we have considered the high -growth scenario population projections  
from  the JICA report , according to which  Bengaluru’s population is likely to increase to about 
20.2 million by 2051 , which is  almost double the present number . Annexure  F provides 
detailed information on the population projections  by JICA  and other agencies . It presents a 
comprehensive explanation of the rationale behind selecting JICA projections , including the 
factors considered  and the challenges encountered when comparing projections from different 
agencies  and jurisdictions . 
Figure 6 Population growth in Bengaluru   
 
Source: WRI India analysis using  Census 2011 , BBMP , RSP 2031 -BMRDA , JICA BWSSB Report  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   45  
The built -up area in the city grew from 192 sq. km. in 1985 to 518 sq. km. in 2015, a 170 percent  
increase in 30 years. This posed a challenge to  city authorities in terms of  quality of life issues , 
service delivery , and governance. As a response, the eight surrounding municipal corporations 
and 110 surrounding villages were amalgamated with the then Bangalore City Corporation 
area of 226 sq  km in 2007. The new and expanded municipal corporation area was renamed 
Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) and covered a total area of approximately 713 
sq. km. 
2.1.1 Climatic and e cological landscape context  
Bengaluru is l ocated in the heart of the Mysore plateau , and at an elevation of 920  m above 
mean sea level . The city’s topography can be classified as a plateau, with a central ridge 
running north to south  with  land sloping gently on either side . The roads have gentle to 
medium gradients. Bengaluru has several freshwater tanks, the largest of which are Bellandur 
lake, Varthur lake, Nagawara lake,  Madivala tank, Hebbal lake, Ulsoor lake, and Sankey tank 
(Mundoli, Nagendra, and Premji 2018) . The tanks or water  bodies  in the city were designed in 
a cascad ing system , from higher to lower levels, making them part of a large network of 
drainage channels.  The idea was that if one lake overflowed, the excess water would flow to 
the subsequent lake. The naturally undulating terrain of the city helps this system. The flow of 
water is from North to South -east as well as North to South -west , along the natural gradient 
of the land . (BIOME 2017)  The soil is predominantly red soil interspersed with rock , helping 
quicker drainage.  
Figure 7: River valley system of Bengaluru and the adjoining region   
 
Source: Exaggerated relief visualisation; WRI India using Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) (refer to 
CCRA -VA report for details)  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   46  
Bengaluru is part of the Eastern Dry Agroclimatic zone of Karnataka. It has a tropical savanna 
climate (Köppen climate classification14) with distinct wet and dry seasons. Due to its 
elevation, the city  enjoys a pleasant and equable climate throughout the year. Winter 
temperatures rarely drop below 12°C and summer temperatures rarely exceed 38°C. 
Monsoons commence sometime around mid -April. The wettest months are August, 
September and October, in that ord er. The city  receives annual average rainfall of about 
790mm from the North -East and South -West monsoons  as per IMD (refer to Chapter 3 for 
more details) .  
Bengaluru falls within the Cauvery -Ponnaiyar  river basin which sets the larger natural 
geographic context of the city. This , along with the city’s elevation , determines its topography, 
climate and natural resource flows , making it a critical component in understanding the city’s 
climatic variations.  
Source: WRI India analysis using  SRTM and Central Water Commission (CWC)  
 
14 This is a widely used vegetation -based empirical climate classification system developed by Wladimir Kopppen. 
Bengaluru  comes under Aw (Type A: Warmest temperature zone and w: Winter dry season)  
Figure 8 Geographical and hydrological context of Bengaluru  within  Cauvery -Ponnaiyar 
Basin region  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   47  
2.1.2  Urban landscape  
Planning and management is an important part of the city’s governance. Considering a larger 
spatial and strategic planning perspective, the Bangalore Metropolitan Region (BMR) 
covering an area of 8 ,005 sq.  km. is considered as the immediate hinterland influenced by 
Bengaluru. Apart from Bengaluru, the BMR has smaller cities and villages, and is bordered by 
the Cauvery river to the south, from where Bengaluru sources water for its daily use. Bengaluru 
is the primate city within BMR , accommodating approximate ly 70% of the region ’s total 
population. The strategic planning within BMR is guided by a regional -level plan (i.e., 
Structure Plan of BMR) , which is non -statutory in nature.  
The administration of Bengaluru is governed by the BBMP , which is referred to as the 
Bengaluru city corporation area (or BBMP area). This is also the jurisdiction considered for 
the BCAP.  The spatial planning jurisdiction for Bengaluru , however , covers a larger area of 
1,307 sq. km. including the BBMP area, known as Bangalore Metropolitan Area (BMA). The 
land use master planning exercise for the city is conducted for BMA area by the Bangalore 
Development Authority  (BDA) . For the purpose of delivery of basic  services, the services 
provided by BBMP cover the municipal  area . Some of the services provided by other agencies 
or parastatals (such as water supply , transport etc.) , cover  slightly different  jurisdictions , 
based on their individual mandates  over and above the BBMP area .  
  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   48  
Figure 9 Physical geography and jurisdictions of BBMP, BMA and BMR  
 
Source: WRI India analysis using SRTM, NASA; World Settlement Footprint  2019, German Aerospace Center 
(DLR)  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   49  
The BMA area currently holds nearly 14.6 % of the state ’s population and 40% of the urban 
population of Karnataka15. A 42% growth in population between 2001 and 2011 points towards 
the fast -paced urbanisation being experienced by the city. Bengaluru  has had high annual 
growth rates compared with  other cities in the country , at 3% for the total population; 6% for 
employment; and 9% for incomes. Within urban Karnataka, the share of the population held 
by the Bangalore Urban Agglomeration (BUA) has more than doubled, increasing from 17.66% 
to 35.96%, during the period from 1951 to 2011. Figure 10 depicts the increase in built -up 
footprint in Bengaluru  from 191.79 sq.km in 1985 to 539.40 sq.km. in 2019.  
Figure 10 Built footprint evolution  across Bengaluru  (Between  1985 to 2019 ) 
Source: WRI India analysis using World Settlement Footprint (WSF) Evolution 1985 -2015, and WSF 2019; 
German Aerospace Center (DLR)  
 
15 This is based on Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru 20 31 (Draft) , which is no longer in action . 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   50  
 
This increase in built -up footprint has resulted in a corresponding decrease in the green and 
blue cover in the city. Multiple studies have been conducted by researchers on this loss of blue -
green networks. Studies indicate a loss of green cover from 68.27% (1973) to less than 15% 
(2013) , and a loss of lakes from 3.4% (1973) to less than 1% (2012)  (Green Spaces in 
Bengaluru , IISc .) These factors need to be integral components of city planning and 
management , while also considering the diversity of people living in the city.  
2.1.3 Socio -economic context  
According to the Economic Survey 2019 -2016, Bengaluru Urban District (BUD)  contributes to 
36% of GSDP  (IBEF 2019)  in which Bengaluru city is the prime economic generator . BUD also 
has the highest per capita income in Karnataka.  The IT sector in Karnataka is primarily 
concentrated in Bengaluru , contributing to almost 25% of the state's GDP and making 
Karnataka the largest IT exporter in the country17. This started with the creation of the 
Karnataka State Electronics Development Corporation (KEONICS) in 1976 and the 
establishment of Electronic Park, India’s  first Software Technology Park (STP) , in Bengaluru , 
propelling  the development of many such clusters across the city.  It gives direct employment 
to over 12 lakh professionals , while also creating over 31 lakh  indirect job opportunities , 
encouraging people from across the country to come to the city.  Apart from the IT sector , 
Bengaluru also has  a significant concentration of biotechnology, aerospace and aviation, and 
manufacturing -related activities . Due to rising land prices, development control regulations , 
and pollution control norms, most of the large industries have gradually moved out of 
Bengaluru to adjoining areas.  The city still has a significant presence  of micro, small and 
medium enterprises (MSMEs) .  
With growth of economy and employment opportunities , Bengaluru  has become home to a 
divers e range  of people and culture s. As with other Indian  states, Karnataka too was carved 
out considering the predominant language spoken by most of the population. The capital, 
Bengaluru , has retained Kannada as the official language , while accommodating other 
languages such as  English, Tamil, and Telugu. over time , due to the diversity of its population .  
This economic growth , along with the city’s overall geography , has long attracted people to 
make it their home. The 2011 Census captured the socioeconomic and demographic 
characteristics of the city extensively, which have been summarily  captured in the sections 
below , namely Demography  and Socio -Economy . These are  followed by a section on 
Accessibility , which looks into  access to key infrastructure and services.  The sections below 
give an overview of each of these aspects  through basic stat istics and a rep resentative map. 
For more details on demographics , socio -economic  aspects,  and accessibility , refer to Chapter s 
5 and 6 of the CCRA -VA report.  
 
16 The economic Survey which is the most reliable source of economic landscape of India presents results  at 
district level and not city level . Hence Bangalore Urb an District has been chosen as a proxy for u nderstanding the 
economy of Ben galuru city which is located within this district and is the most prime economi c hub.  
17 Karnataka’s had nearly 40% of the country's information technology exports of 155 billion USD in 2019 -20 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   51  
Demographics  parameters  
Key demographic parameters of Bengaluru are given in Figure 11.  
The gross population density of Bengaluru is 119 persons per hectare. Figure 12 shows the  
ward -wise distribution of population density.  It can be seen from the map  that wards within 
the core  city are denser  than  peripheral wards.  The core city could be attributed the erstwhile 
Bangalore Mahanagar Palike (BMP) . To accommodate the increasing growth pressure , the cit y 
had to  expand beyond the core , thus leading to unplanned urban spread . The city’s built -up 
growth (see Figure 10) indicates its expansion towards its periphery, where urban planning 
measures have not been able to keep pace with the growth pressures , resulting in the creation 
of areas which are vulnerable to climate hazards.   
 
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   52  
 
Figure 11 Key demographic parameters of Bengaluru  
 
Source: WRI India analysis using Census, 2011 ; wards information from BBMP  
 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   53  
Figure 12 Distributio n of population density  by ward  
Source: WRI India analysis using Census , 2011 ; wards information from BBMP  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   54  
Socio -econom ic parameters   
Key socio -economic parameters of Bengaluru are given in Figure 13. 
A significant proportion of the city’s population live s in informal settlements and slums. As 
per the Karnataka Slum Development Board (KSDB), Bengaluru city has 257 notified slums , 
housing more than 3 lakh  people  (KSDB 2011)  while the other categories of slums are home 
to nearly 4 lakh residents18. Figure 14 indicates the location of notified slums in Bengaluru .  
The houseless population, population living in houses with temporary roofing and wall 
materials, and households that do not own the residence they are living in, are all factors 
indicative of inadequate housing access.  However, due to paucity of data on the houseless 
population, these often remain unaccounted though these are one of the most vulnerable 
groups.  Obser ving the city’s housing condition , the Census 2011 reveals that a lmost a quarter 
of households do not have permanent roofing material , making th em susceptible to climatic 
risks.   
As per Census 2011, nearly 44.5 lakh people are migrants to Bengaluru19, out which 30% 
migrated to the city for work/ business related reasons. According to Karnataka’s State 
Economic Survey 2021 -22, Bengaluru emerged  as one of India's top job -providing cities, 
leading to its reputation as a city of migrants . However, there is a lack of data on climate -
induced migration in Bengaluru . Studies have shown that millions of people in India were 
displaced in 2021 due to climate -related disasters, highlighting the need for detailed data at 
the city level. These studies underscore  the importance of addressing climate migrants and 
their impact in research a nd climate analysis.  
 
18 The 2011 Census includes three type s of slums : notified, recogn ised and identified slums. Slums in India: A 
statistical compendium 2015  [I cannot insert a comment in footnotes, hence inserting text here:  should this be in 
brackets? Is it a Census -related document? It’s a bit awkward to just insert it as ordinary text between two 
sentences in a footnote. I suggest using parentheses] . As per the 2011 Census , BBMP ( municipal corporation area 
+ outgrowths ) slums have total of 1,65,341 households and a population of 7,12,801. PCA Slum: Primary census 
abstract data for slum, India and States/UTs - Town Level - 2011 , Census 2011 .  
19 Numbers refer to the ‘Bruhat Bangalore Urban Agglomeration’ – area a slightly bigger than the current ULB 
limits. Total migrants consist of all durations of residence. Census 2011, D -Series (D03, UA -2900 -MDDS). 
https://censusindia.gov.in/census.website/data/census -tables   
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   55  
Figure 13 Key socio -economic parameters of Bengaluru  
 
 
Source: WRI India using Census 2011 ; Karnataka Slum Development Board, (Patel, Furlan, and Grosvald, 2021)  
(IIMB 2020) , wards information from BBMP.  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   56  
 
 
Figure 14 Location of slums  along with population density distribution as per built settlement  
 
Source:  WRI India using  KSRSAC buildings data; Landuse from BBMP, and estimated population density from 
Census 2011 (refer to CCR -VA for details)

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   57  
Accessibility  parameters  
Figure 15 illustrates key accessibility parameters of Bengaluru . Maps from  Figure 16 to Figure 
22 depict access  of households  to various  services and infrastructure in the city.  
The city has managed to provide  electricity access to almost all its households.  It can be seen 
from Figure 16, that barring a few wards in the inner -city area, the majority of peripheral  
wards  comparatively lack access to  clean cooking fuel . Figure 17 shows that peripheral wards 
also l ack access to the water distribution network . Around  15%20 of households  in the city  do 
not have access to either piped sewers and/ or septic tanks.  The paucity of connection to the 
central ised network or  to septic tanks is significantly  higher in peripheral wards  (see Figure 
18). The overall percentage of households in the city with  access to a latrine within the 
premises is about 97%. The city is fairly well connected in terms of public transport through 
bus stops  (see Figure 19), but connectivity, frequency, and other issues  contribute to higher 
depe nden ce on private modes  of transport . In terms of access to healthcare, 89% of  the city’s 
population has access to an in -patient facility within the standard response time of 10 minutes . 
However, most government  hospitals , as seen in Figure 20, are located within the city core , 
and the population  outside the core ( beyond the  intermediate ring road) has to travel more 
than 5 km on average  to access  a government hospital  in an ambulance . The city has 17 fire 
stations within the BBMP limits , and two more just outside the periphery. More than 60% of 
city’s population live outside a 7-minute  response time from these fire stations  (see Figure 21). 
Highly dense areas of the city such as Devara Jeevanahalli, Malleswaram, and Basa veshwara 
Nagar lack immediate access to fire services.  Bengaluru excels on school accessibility, with 
100% of its population within 10  minute s’ walking  distance of a school. In addition, 97% of the 
population also has access government schools within said walkable time. The city core has 
reasonable access to organised green open spaces (see Figure 22), with the exception of  
Kammanahalli (Ward 28) , which has no  public park or playground within a walking  distance 
of 10  minute s. The p eriphery of the city has the least provision ing of organised green  open 
spaces . For example,  in Gottigere (Ward 194), and Chowdeswari (Ward 02), only around  12% 
and 25% of the population respectively has easy access to organised  green spaces.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 This includes latrines connected to systems other than septic and piped water sewer system s: pit latrine with 
slab, pit latrine without slab, open pit, service latrine with night soil disposed into open drain, service latrine with 
night soil removed by humans, service latrine with night soil serviced by animals, and any other.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   58  
Figure 15 Key Accessibility parameters of Bengaluru  
 
Source:  WRI India using  KSRSAC buildings data; Landuse from BBMP, and estimated population density from 
2011 (refer to CCR -VA for details)  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   59  
Source: WRI India analysis  using Census 2011 ; wards information from  BBMP  
 
Figure 16 Ward -wise lack of prevalence of clean cooking fuel  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   60  
Figure 17 Ward -wise lack of access to treated drinking w ater  
 
Source: WRI India analysis using Census 2011 ; wards information from BBMP   

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   61  
Figure 18 Ward -wise access to piped sewer and septic tanks  
 
Source: WRI India analysis  using Census 2011 ; wards information from BBMP  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   62  
Figure 19 Access to public transport (bus stops ) within 5 -minute walkable distance  
 
Source: WRI India analysis  using  bus stops and b uildings data from KSRSAC ; Landuse from BBMP and 
population density estimated using Census 2011 (refer to CCRA -VA for details)   

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   63  
Figure 20 Access to government hospitals  within 10 -minute of ambulance service area  
 
Source: WRI India analysis using hospital information from  Vigeyepms 2022 ; buildings data from KSRSAC; 
Landuse from BBMP and population density estimated using Census 2011 (refer to CCRA -VA for details)  
  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   64  
Figure 21 Access to fire stations  within 7 -minute standard response time for fire tenders  
 
Source: WRI India analysis  using  fire stations from K-GIS 2022 ; buildings data from KSRSAC; Landuse from 
BBMP and population density estimated using Census 2011 (refer to CCRA -VA for details)   

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   65  
Figure 22 Access to parks and grounds  within 10 -minute walkable distance  
 
Source: WRI India analysis  using  KSRSAC  buildings data ; Landuse from  BBMP , and estimated population 
density from 2011 (refer to CCR -VA for details)  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   66  
2.2  Sectoral status and e merging challenges  
As mentioned in Chapter 1, seven priority sectors have been identified for developing 
mitigation and adaptation/resilience strategies for Bengaluru to transition towards a carbon -
neutral and resilient city. These  sectors are mentioned in  Figure 23 (also refer to Figure 2). 
The following section will give an overview of the existing situation for each sector. This is 
explained through three main aspects: 1)  status quo of the sector, 2)  ongoing initiatives in the 
sector , and 3)  key challenges to be addressed in the sector. This assessment is based on 
information gathered from stakeholder consultations, literature review , and the experience of 
working in the city. Along with quantitative assessments from Chapter s 3 and 4, insights 
gathered from this section have significantly contributed to arriving at sector -specific actions 
recommended through  the BCAP.  
Figure 23 Priority sectors identified for targeted actions  
 
Source: As identified by BBMP with the technical support of WRI India  
2.2.1  Energy and b uildings  
Status quo of the sector  
The energy and building s sector is an important infrastructure component for the growth of 
an economy , especially for Bengaluru. Karnataka’s economic growth is concentrated around 
the city,  which has a significant influence on the demand for energy in terms of electricity and 
fuel for wide -ranging activities.  
While LPG is widely available in Karnataka  (PPAC 2020) , including in Bengaluru, affordability 
remains a barrier to consistent use. As a result, a portion of  low-income households remain 
reliant on fossil  fuels such as firewood, which affect air quality and health.  
All states and Union Territories have established green building cells. The p romotion and 
adoption of green buildings in cities is evident. Maharashtra  leads the country, with the 
highest number of green buildings , while  Karnataka is fourth  (Manasi et al. 2021) . In 
Karnataka, Bengaluru has some of the highest -rated buildings. There are approximately 36 
LEED/IGBC and GRIHA -certified buildings in B UD. In 2021, Bengaluru achieved 3 out of 5 
stars in the city preparedness performance assessment under the Climate Smart Cities 
Assessment Framework (CSCAF) 2.0 , conducted by the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs. It has been recommended that cities like Bengaluru focus on energy efficiency and  the 
adoption of green buildings to address the cooling requirements of the  built environment, 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   67  
especially considering extreme heat and GHG emissions  (NIUA 2021) . Presently, the 
Karnataka Energy Conservation Building Code (K -ECBC) 2014, is mandatory, and is 
applicable for commercial buildings or complexes with a connected load of 100 kW or greater, 
or a contract demand of 120 kVA or greater. Notably, the K -ECBC is only applicable for major 
renovations and new buildings in the commercial segment. The Eco Niwas Samhita (ENS) is 
applicable for new residential buildings only and no exiting build ing or renovations/ additions 
are included under its scope.    
Industry accounts for 18 -19% of the total electricity demand in Karnataka  (Strafford Regional 
Planning Commission 2018) . For the past  few years, the industrial plants within the BBMP 
area were either being shifted to nearby industrial areas or were  being closed. There are 370 
large -scale industries, 413 medium -scale industries, and 91,312 MSME ( enterprises 
comprising both manufacturing and service entities) in BUD  (MSME 2016) .  
Ongoing initiatives in the city  
The energy and building s sector is governed by multiple statutory and regulatory frameworks. 
Some  key ones are listed below : 
• Energy Conservation Act and Amendment (Central Act, 2022)  
• Electricity Act and Amendment (Central Act, 2003 and 2007)  
• Karnataka Electricity Reforms Act, 1999  
• Karnataka Electricity Regulatory Commission Regulation, 2000  
• Karnataka Model Building Bye-laws , 2016  
• Karnataka Electricity Regulatory Commission - net metering regulations 2016  
Several ongoing initiatives developed by national and state agencies are being implemented 
by city - or state -designated nodal agencies in a manner suitable for their respective location s. 
Table 2 below lists some such  initiatives in Bengaluru, categor ised on the basis of their 
strategic orientation. The broader objectives of these initiatives , and their alignment with  the 
BCAP goals , are also listed in the table.  
Table 2 Ongoing initiatives in the energy and building s sector in Bengaluru  
Strategic Orientation:  Grid electricity decarbon isation  
Initiatives:  
• Karnataka Renewable Energy 
Policy , 2022 -2027  
• National Solar Mission (NSM), 
2010  
• Rooftop Solar Programme Ph -II, 
2019  Objectives:  
These initiatives aim to strengthen Karnataka’s 
position as a preferred destination renewable energy 
(RE) sector and create an ecosystem for sustainable 
and green energy development, thereby reducing 
GHG emissions. They  ensure that efforts are made  to 
lessen the detrimental effect of electricity generation  
on the environment. The initiatives also aim to foster 
the just transition to cleaner fuels for electricity 
generation.  
Strategic Orientation: Green buildings and  low-carbon buildings  
Initiatives:  
• K-ECBC, 2014  
• Eco-Niwas Samhita (ENS) – Part 1, 
2018  Objectives:  
These initiatives aim to lay down the  minimum 
requirements for the energy -efficient design and 
construction of buildings and their systems without 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   68  
• Eco-Niwas Samhita (ENS) – Part 2, 
2021  
• National Building Codes, 2016  
• Karnataka Model Building Bye -
Laws, 2016  
 compromising  on the comfort, health, and 
productivity of the occupants. The implementation 
of these initiatives is expected not only to result in 
significant energy savings , but also  to reduce GHG 
emissions and promote sustainable development.  
Strategic Orientation:  Energy efficiency  
Initiatives:  
• Karnataka Energy Conservation 
and Energy Efficiency Policy 2022 
– 2027  
• Phase -II Hosa Belaku, 2017  
• Pavan Scheme, 2017  
• National Mission for Enhanced 
Energy Efficiency (NMEEE), 2011  
 Objectives:  
These initiatives aim to promote energy -efficient 
appliances and energy conservation to increase the 
resilience and reliability  of the electricity grid, and to 
provide environmental, community , and health 
benefits. The key objective is to increase buildings 
that use less energy to heat, cool, run appliances , and 
electronics, as well as manufacturing facilities that 
use less energy to produce goods without 
compromising the performance and end -result.   
Strategic Orientation:  Transition to clean fuels  
Initiatives:  
• Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana 
2.0, 2016  
• Go Electric campaign - eCooking 
Devices, 2021  
• Perform Achieve and Trade Scheme 
(PAT), 2012  
• Gruha Jyot hi Scheme , 2023  
 Objectives:  
These initiatives aim to promote usage  of cleaner 
fuels in residential, commercial , and industrial 
buildings.  
 
 Areas  of improvement for addressing barriers to a climate -progressive energy sector  
1. System operation  flexibility  
Operation flexibility is a kind of preparedness for  unexpected or unforeseen electricity 
production or consumption variations , and it determines how easily grid infrastructure can be 
modif ied and can withstand such variations. According to  the International Energy Agency 
(IEA) phase assessment framework, Karnataka is currently in phase 3 of renewable 
integration , and is ahead of other Indian states  in electricity generation from variable 
renewable energy (solar and wind) . Hence , Karnataka  is experiencing system integ ration 
challenges that other Indian states  are yet to experience . As the integration of renewable 
energy sources  increases , we can expect  to see challenges that have not been experienced by 
any Indian state  (IEA 2021) . Hence, increasing resilient infrastructure and strengthening the 
grid distribution network is a matter for careful consideration and planning , along with tariff 
reforms.  
2. Present contracting protocols making  clean energy prices  higher to the end -
consumer s  
Despite increased procurement of renewable power by BESCOM in recent years, BESCOM 
continues to pay the fixed charges of long -term agreements  with thermal power plants , leading 
to an overall  increase in  power -purchase cost per unit and therefore an increase in tariffs.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   69  
3. Incentives and enforcement of energy -efficient buildings in the city  
The World Green Building Council estimates that green buildings could generate higher 
returns by saving 0.5 % to 12 % in additional costs and have  the potential to decrease 
operational costs by up to 37%. The sales of green building s are much faster , with sales 
premium s of up to 31% . Such buildings also have up to 23% higher occupancy rates and rental 
income up to 8%  higher than conventional buildings . At the same time, there are not many 
financial inducements to make passive energy conservation measures economically viable. 
Adoption and enforcement of the implementation of ECBC and ENS codes in Bengaluru 
remains a challenge. The amended Energy Conse rvation Act, 2022, has extended the codes to 
new residential and office buildings.    
4. Penetration and adoption of electric cooking  
Understanding user preferences and the local cooking context can play a key role for policy 
makers in developing cooking solutions that will see greater adoption for accelerating e -
Cooking transition. The ability of low -income households to pay for the inc rease in electricity 
costs due to cooking compared to electricity is to be considered in this regard. The promotion 
of the health benefits associated with electric cooking needs to be accelerated.    
2.2.2  Transportation  
Status quo of the sector  
At present, Bengaluru’s public transport system primarily includes two modes: bus services 
offered by BMTC21, and metro rail services offered by BMRCL. A suburban rail system is being 
planned by KRIDE, which is currently under construction. The d istribution of trips according 
to mode of travel reveals that 32% of trips  in the city  are made using public transport (bus and 
metro), while the share of private modes , i.e., motorcycles and cars , is 27% and 7% , 
respectively  (CMP -Bengaluru 2020)22. Autorickshaws and taxis offering intermediate public 
transport (IPT) services in the city have a combined mode share of 7% , and  26% of trips are 
on foot,  which is lower than in  other metro cities such as Mumbai (46%) (CMP -Mumbai 2016)  
and Delhi (35%)  (Delhi 2019) . The estimated annual Vehicle Kilometres  Travelled (VKT) by 
all modes is 30 ,000  million k m.23 At present , all motorised modes in Bengaluru are 
predominantly fossil fuel based, as seen in  
Figure 24. 
 
 
 
 
21 And KSRTC for few routes.  
22 Data based on RITES Study, 2016 . 
23 WRI India Analysis done for calculating Transport sector’s GHG emission s inventory 2019.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   70  
 
Figure 24 Fuel share of different transport modes in Bengaluru for 2019  
 
Source: WRI India analysis based on vehicle registration data till 2019  for RTOs within the BBMP boundary, 
Vahan Dashboard - Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRTH)  
 
Ongoing initiatives in the city  
The transport sector in the city is governed by multiple statutory and regulatory frameworks. 
The key ones are listed below : 
• The Motor Vehicles Act , 1988 (Central Act 59 of 1988)  
• Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989  
• The Karnataka Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989  
• The Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act , 1957 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1957)  
• The Road Transport Corporations Act, 1950  
Bengaluru is currently implementing (or planning for) various policies, plans , and schemes 
within this sector. Some key initiatives are listed below, categor ised on the basis of their 
strategic orientation. The broader objectives of these initiatives along , with their alignment  
with the BCAP goals of mitigation, adaptation and resilience -building , are listed in the table 
below.  
Table 3 Ongoing initiatives in the transportation sector in Bengaluru  
Strategic Orientation:  Land Use Transport Integration and  Overarching Transport 
Plans/Policies  
Initiatives:  
• Comprehensive Mobility Plan (CMP) 
for Bengaluru, 202024 
• Bengaluru Transit -oriented 
Development (TOD) Policy, 2022  
• Approved BMLTA Bill, 2022  Objectives:  
These initiatives aim to achieve land use  transport 
integration , which will help reduc e vehicular trips 
and minim ise travel distances , thereby reducing 
emissions. Other initiatives focus on improving the 
existing transport ecosystem and processes in the 
 
24 Strategies/Themes under CMP include: 1) Integrated Land Use  and Mobility Plan, 2) PT Improvement Plan, 3) 
Road Network Development Plan, 4) NMT Plan, 5) Multi -Modal Mobility Plan, 6) P rivate  Transport Management 
Plan, 7) Freight Movement Plan, 8) Travel Demand Management Plan, 9) Regulatory Measures, 10) Governance 
Measures, and 11) Fiscal Measures . 020406080100
Buses Car Motorcycle Autorickshaw Taxi Freight% share
Petrol Diesel CNG LPG Electric Others
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   71  
• City Logistics Plan  
 city, which indirectly helps reduc e vehicular 
emissions through strategies such as  having an 
overarching transport authority  and coordinated 
freight movement. Therefore , these initiatives 
mainly address the BCAP goal of mitigation . 
Strategic Orientation: Public Transport Improvement Strategies   
Initiatives:  
• Extension of metro rail network  
• Suburban rail lines under construction  
• Metro feeder services by BMTC  
• E-Bike Taxi Scheme  
• Bengaluru Parking Policy 2.0  
• CMP strategies  
• Shakti Scheme , 2023  Objectives:  
These initiatives aim  to improve  public transport  
network connectivity, ridership, accessibility, first - 
and last -mile connectivity , i.e., overall improvement 
of the  city’s  public transport system , thereby helping 
reduc e the use of private motorised modes. Hence, 
they  mainly address the BCAP goal of mitigation.  
Strategic Orientation : Non-Motorised  Transport (NMT)  Strategies  
Initiatives:  
• Extension of Public Bike Sharing 
(PBS)  
• CMP Strategies  
• Draft Active Mobility Bill – Karnataka , 
2021  
• Street or NMT infrastructure 
improvement projects under the 
Smart Cities Mission  Objectives:  
These initiatives aim to improve the ecosystem for 
non-motorised transport in the city and facilitate its 
uptake. The y address the mitigation goal of the 
BCAP by reducing the use of motorised modes  of 
transport . 
Strategic Orientation:  Clean Fuel and  Fuel Efficiency Strategies  
Initiatives:  
• Electric Vehicle and Energy Storage 
Policy 2017 (GoK)  
• Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of 
Hybrid and Electric Vehicles (FAME 
2) 
• E-Bike Taxi Scheme  
• BMTC leases e -buses under 'Grand 
Challenge' by CESL  
• Introduction of BS6 vehicles  
• Initiatives on sustainable urban freight 
by DULT  
• Voluntary Vehicle Fleet Modern isation 
Program me (V-VMP)/ Vehicle 
Scrappage Policy , 2021  
• Feasibility study on use of EVs for 
solid waste collection – conducted by 
DULT in collaboration with BBMP and 
Kinetic Green Energy and Power 
Solutions Ltd  Objectives:  
These initiatives aim to promote the use of cleaner 
fuels in vehicles , and to improve vehicle technology 
to reduce emissions and increase their  fuel 
efficiency. They directly address the mitigation goal 
of BCAP.  
 
Areas of improvement for addressing barriers to a climate -progressive transport  sector  
1. Integration of  land use  and transport  
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   72  
Rapid urban isation , along with rising income levels and motor isation rates , have led to the 
horizontal expansion of the city. At present, 25% of the city’s population resides within 10 
minutes ’ walk ing distance of metro stations .25 The average trip length in the city has increased 
from 6.47 km26 in 2011 to 8.93 km (CMP -Bengaluru 2020)  in 2016, which can be attributed to 
the physical expansion of the city. A city growth strategy based on  the integration of  land use  
and transport , as well as  compact development principles , can help reduce the number of trips 
and trip distances, and encourage a shift to sustainable low -carbon modes  of transport , 
thereby reducing emissions and other negative externalities. The recently approved Bengaluru 
TOD Policy is a welcome step in this direction . The BMLTA bill is expected to be play a 
significant role.   
 
2. Public transport services  
There is need for improvement in seamless multi -modal integration, and first - and last -mile 
connectivity (especially in the outer suburbs/peripheries).  About  94% of the city’s population 
has access to bus stops within five minutes ’ walk ing distance27. However limited fleet size of 
buses results in service -connectivity and frequency issues. Availability and affordability of IPT 
services for first - and last -mile connectivity is also a barrier to the greater uptake of public 
transport modes.    
3. NMT and road infrastructure  
Bengaluru’s road network spans 14,000 km. However , it lacks adequate structure, a clear 
functional hierarchy, and connectivity, particularly in the outer new growth areas  (CMP -
Bengaluru 2020) . This  has contributed to growing traffic congestion and low travel speeds 
(10-15 kmph) on all major roads in the city. The quality of pedestrian and cycling 
infrastructure is decisive in increasing  the share of  NMT mode s. As per CMP 2020, at present, 
footpaths are available only along 47% of the road length (CMP -Bengaluru 2020) . The 
introduction of the Public Bike Sharing (PBS) system in the city has fuelled  the usage of 
bicycles. This , along with the mode share of walking (26%) , illustrates the potential for a shift 
to NMT modes if adequate infrastructure is provided.  
 
4. High dependenc e on private modes  
In 2019, the total number of vehicles registered in the BBMP area was almost 84 lakh ,28 
putting Bengaluru only behind Delhi’s 1.5 crore vehicles  (Kulkarni 2019) . The number of 
vehicles  in the city is growing  at an alarming rate, with a 6 ,099% increase observed between 
1976 and 2016  (E. Bureau 2017) . The consequences of this include severe traffic congestion 
 
25 WRI Analysis done for phases 1 and 2 of Bengaluru Metro. Refer CCRA -VA report for the map . 
26 Bangalore Mobility Indicator -BBMP+BIAPPA*, 2011 by DULT. Data of 2010 -11. 
27 WRI Analysis. Refer to CCRA -VA report for t he map . 
28 The precise number is 83,85 ,360. WRI Analysis using data from Parivahan  Portal of Transport Department. 
Data taken till March 2019.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   73  
and increase in travel time, accidents, parking demand (resulting in unregulated parking), fuel 
consumption , and air pollution , ultimately impacting public health and productivity.  
5. High fossil fuel dependency  
In 2019 (baseline year for this study), Bengaluru had less than 1% of electric vehicles  (EVs)  
in its total fleet ( see Figure 24). Decarbon ising road transport would require an urgent shift 
towards cleaner fuels such as electricity and hydrogen , as well as improved fuel efficiency. 
This must be supported with a conducive ecosystem of policies, finance , and infrastructure. 
Refer to Annexure  D for a detailed barrier analysis on shifting towards cleaner fuels.  
6. Sustainable freight management  
Freight vehicle registrations in the city increased significantly at a CAGR of 4.8% between 
2009 and 2019  (Somya Jain 2021) . The majority of freight vehicles (55%) in Bengaluru are 
light commercial vehicles (LCV) , and there is a surge in their numbers. A major reason for this 
is the increase in e -commerce  related activities  (Somya Jain 2021) . Figure 43 shows that 
freight contributes 42% of  GHG emissions. Hence, it is crucial to look holistically at this sector 
from the perspective of shifting these modes away from fossil fuels and optim ising their 
movement.  
7. Resilient transport system  
The transport sector is particularly vulnerable to climate change impacts , and is frequently 
affected by flooding on roads and degradation of pavements, disrupting the smooth flow of 
traffic  (Vajjarapu, Verma, and Allirani 2020) . The e xtreme flood events that Bengaluru has 
witnessed frequently in recent  years affect  the transport system in multiple ways – by 
increasing travel time  and vehicle kilometres travelled (VKT) and decreasing travel speeds  – 
leading to congestion. This , in turn , affects life, property, productive hours, and the city’s 
economy , especially the informal and gig economy. Flood events also affect NMT 
infrastructure, further restricting people from using these modes. Therefore, a resilient 
transport infrastruct ure is needed for making the city climate resilient.   
2.2.3  Solid waste management          
Status quo of the sector  
Bengaluru’s waste generation is increasing continuously , due to the growing population, 
economic development, and lifestyle changes. Of the various  types of waste, solid waste is the 
primary contributor to GHG emissions from waste in the city. In 2019, Bengaluru’s daily solid 
waste generation was 5 ,400 ton nes,29 translating to 0.56  kg per capita per day, of which  61% 
was wet and 39% was dry waste , as seen in  Figure 25. 
 
 
29 2019 data shared by BBMP with  WRI India for the BCAP p reparatio n. 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   74  
Figure 25: Solid waste composition in Bengaluru  
 
Source: Solid Waste Management: Current Scenario and Challenges in Bengaluru | Intech Open  
 
Bulk waste generators contribute 25% of the city’s waste. BBMP , the agency responsible  for 
managing solid waste , established Bengaluru Solid Waste Management Limited (BSWML) as 
a government -owned company in 2021, to execute solid waste management projects on its 
behalf  (Subhashini 2023) . At the time of this study , about 30% of waste is handled  directly  by 
BBMP , and the remaining 70% by empanelled  service providers. As per directions by the High 
Court  of Karnataka , BBMP has notified bulk generators to segregate waste into different 
categories and to either manage their waste  in situ or utilise the services of BBMP  empanelled  
service providers  (BBMP 2015) . Of more than  20,000 pourakarmikas , 3,917 are assigned to 
street sweeping , while 18,562 take care of door -to-door collection and transportation of waste  
(Naveen and Puvvadi 2020) . Currently, there is only one active landfill in the city , in 
Mitaganahalli , where mixed waste is dumped. Further, t here are only five functional wet waste 
processing units , with a capacity of  around 1 ,100 TPD , and 119 dry waste collection centres  
across  the city.30 Figure 26 presents a map of the city’s landfill and processing units.  
Considering reports of open burning of waste contributing to the air pollution in the city, 
BBMP has introduced several measures to reduce the open burning of waste.    
 
30 2019 data shared by BBMP to WRI India for the BCAP p reparatio n 
Organic waste 
26%
Food waste 
35%Paper and cardboard 
12%Textile 
4%Plastic 
12%Glass
3%Other -includes debris, 
sanitary, wood, leather, 
rubber etc.
8%
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   75  
Figure 26: Location of currently functional landfill and processing units in Bengaluru  
 Source: WRI India  analysis  2021 ; BBMP 2019  
 
 
Ongoing initiatives in the city  
The city’s s olid waste management sector is governed by multiple statutory and regulatory 
frameworks. A few key ones are listed below : 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   76  
• Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016  
• Construction and Demolition Waste Management Rules, 2016  
• Plastic Waste Management Amendment Rules, 2021  
• Swachh Bharat Mission, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, Go I (2014 onwards)  
• BBMP SWM Bye-laws , 2020  
Bengaluru is currently implementing (or planning for) various policies, plans , and schemes 
within this sector. Some key initiatives are listed below, categor ised on the basis of their 
strategic orientation. The broader objectives of these initiatives along with their alignment 
with  the BCAP goals of mitigation, adaptation and resilience building are listed in the table 
below.  
Table 4 Ongoing solid waste management initiatives in Bengaluru  
Strategic Orientation:  Improving waste collection, transportation and monitoring    
Initiatives:  
• Single use plastic ban  
• Streamlining bulk waste generators  
• A pilot ward level micro plan as per the 
SWM manual, 2017.  
• Tenders floated for new waste collection 
vehicles  
• Purchase of 25 sweeping machines  
• ICT-based technology solutions - GPS 
tracking of tipper vehicles  
• Introduction of a control room and 
mobile app to manage collection and 
transportation  
• Ezetap app for imposing penalties on 
polluters and monitoring garbage -
vulnerable points  Objectives:  
These initiatives aim to achieve efficient 
segregation of waste at source , which will help 
reduc e the excessive mixed waste entering the 
landfill and improve collection efficiency , thereby 
reducing emissions. They directly address the 
mitigation goal of the BCAP by  contributing to 
promot e inclusive development and building 
resilience.   
 
Strategic Orientation: Increasing waste processing and recycling capacity  
Initiatives:  
• Upgrading old/existing processing units  
• Building 50-TPD bio-methanation 
plants  
• Decentral ised processing of waste by 
stream  
• Adding more DWCC and aggregators.  Objectives:  
These initiatives aim to achieve increased 
central ised and decentral ised waste processing 
in the city , contributing to reduced landfill 
usage, mitigation of GHG emissions, job  
creations and economic benefits, and resilience 
building.  
They directly address the adaptation/resilience 
and mitigation goal s of the BCAP.  
Strategic Orientation:  Implementing legacy waste management and recovery strategies  
Initiatives:  
• Implementing biomining at the Mandur 
landfill (closed) with about 135 acres of 
land , to deal with legacy waste  
• Proposed six waste -to-energy (WtE ) 
plants with a total capacity of 2 ,600 
tonnes Objectives:  
These initiatives aim to achieve improved 
decomposition of organic waste and land 
reclamation , also adding to groundwater  and 
environment protection. The other initiative of 
WtE  would increase energy generation and 
resource recovery. These initiatives  contribute to 
improving public health, reducing 
environmental contamination, and enhancing 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   77  
community well -being. They directly address 
both the adaptation/resilience and mitigation 
goal s of the BCAP.  
 
Areas of improvement for addressing barriers to a climate -progressive solid waste  sector  
1. Segregation at source  
In 2019, the city  had about 70% segregation of dry and wet waste at the source of the 
household. BBMP’s SWM Bye-laws , 2020 , categorised waste into six categories : wet 
(biodegradable), dry (non -biodegradable), domestic hazardous, e -waste, construction and 
demolition (C&D) , and garden waste. Illegal dumping of C&D waste is a major challenge , and 
the strict implementation of C&D Management Rules, 2016 , is needed for  the effective 
collection of debris.  
2. Waste transportation infrastructure  
The waste is collected in pushcarts and autos/tempos  and transported to the primary 
collection centres. A portion  of the segregated waste from source ends up getting mixed, due 
to the lack of compartmental provisions in transport . Adequate transportation infrastructure 
for solid waste , with clear compartments and continuous tracking and monitoring , would also 
improve processing performance.  
3. Processing and recycling units  
Out of the total solid waste collected , about 36% of the city’s total wet waste is composted , and 
20% of dry waste is recycled. There are five functioning central ised composting , and five bio-
methanisation units , across the city. Currently , there are only  a few community -level 
composting plants . BBMP is working to develop  a Decentralised Processing Unit  (Bengaluru 
2019) . At the time of this study, 16 wards  have identified  a location for a local composting 
plant. Enforcement of the ‘polluter pays ’ principle is a significant challenge  (Reddy 2018) . 
There is one operational C&D waste processing plant in Bengaluru , in Chikkajala, on the 
outskirts of the city, where 20% of the city’s C&D waste is recycled  (B.M. Bureau 2022) .  
4. Waste recovery  
While six waste -to-energy (WtE) plants have long been proposed ,31 they are yet to be 
implemented. Setting up the WtE plants requires higher capital investment and is a more 
complex process compared to the other options for waste disposal. Lack of markets for 
end/recycled products, high management costs, lack of incentives to invest in such circular 
economy enterprises, rising fuel cost s for transporting waste, insufficient funding etc ., are 
leading to inefficient waste recovery. Unattended legacy waste and recycling and reuse of C&D 
waste remain challenges  due to a lack of awareness of the benefits. Business models for 
 
31 2019 data shared by BBMP to WRI India for Bengaluru Climate Action Plan Preparation  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   78  
climate -friendly waste recovery and circular economy need  to be scaled up  to bridge the gap s 
and reduce  waste.  
5. Disposal of waste  and landfill management  
About 44% of mixed waste goes to the Mitaganahalli landfill, the only active landfill dumpsite 
in the city  (Reporter 2020) . The high composition of wet waste in the landfills releases 
methane and the seepage of leachate, leading to emissions, air pollution, and soil and 
groundwater contamination . Moreover , due to the lack of land available to accommodate 
multiple landfills, the transport of waste from all over the city to the Mitaganahalli landfill 
contribut es to excessive costs and related externalities  (Dr Roopa 2016) . There is a need for 
scientific management of landfills and bioremediation of legacy waste to reduce GHG 
emissions from the waste sector.  
6. Public awareness o f climate change impacts of open burning/dumping of waste  
After the ban o n open dumping/burning of waste, the core city could see significant  reduction 
in this activity . However , due to lack of awareness among st low-income communities about 
the harmful effects of the open burning of waste and the benefits of alternative waste 
management practices, many residents continue to burn waste in open fires. While the ban on 
open burning of waste is an important step towards reducing air pollution in Bengaluru, more  
needs to be done to address the challenges and ensure that the ban is eff ectively enforced.  
7. Open burning of waste  
Open burning of waste is a significant contributor to both particulate matter and GHG 
emissions. The combustion of waste in open fires releases particulate matter, carbon 
monoxide, nitrogen oxides, and volatile organic compounds, which can cause respirator y 
problems and aggravate existing conditions. The smoke and pollutants emitted during open 
burning can travel long distances and contribute to the formation of ground -level ozone and 
smog, reducing visibility and harming vegetation. In addition, open burni ng can release highly 
toxic chemicals such as dioxins and furans, which can have serious long -term health effects. 
It is a significant contributor to air pollution and poses considerable impacts on air quality , it 
is important to implement regulations and control measures to reduce or eliminate the 
practice  and mitigate its impacts on public health and the environment.  
2.2.4  Air quality 
Status quo of the sector  
In India, there are 131 non -attainment cities identified for the National Clean Air Program me 
(NCAP) , including  Bengaluru. This program me aims to reduce PM 2.5 and PM10 levels by 20-
30% across these 131 cities by 2024, taking levels in 2017 as the base year. Other pollutants , 
such as NO x, SO 2, CO, and O 3 are mostly within the prescribed national standard s (MoEFCC 
2019) . However, looking at the air pollution emission trends, the Government of India has 
updated its target reduction levels to 35 -50% PM2.5 and PM10 by 2025 -26, and has launched 
a new mission , Clean Air for All , to focus on the enhanced reduction targets.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   79  
The new mission plays a vital role as it has the potential to effectively elevate program mes to 
mission mode, as demonstrated previously by  the National Solar Mission and others. The 
Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) developed a 44 -point joint action plan  for 
Bengaluru, which  has been approved by the Air Quality Monitoring Committee (AQMC). 
However, the first draft action plan was not approved by  the Central Pollution Control Board 
(CPCB) , and  KSPCB has prepared a revised action plan based on the feedback from the CPCB .  
A comparative analysis of pollutant concentrations between  the pre-lockdown (01 –23 March 
2020) and lockdown (24 March –12 May 2020) periods show s a huge reduction in the ambient 
concentration of air pollutants  – 49% (NO x), 10% (SO 2), and 37.7% (PM 2.5) resulting in 
improved air quality over Bengaluru during the COVID -19 lockdown period   (Gouda et al. 
2020) . However, when the pandemic restrictions were eased, air pollution shot up to pre -
pandemic levels. The city received a fresh grant of Rs 108.75 crore from the 15th Finance 
Commission for  the financial year  2022 -23 for improving air quality. This  is in addition to Rs 
147.35 crore for 2021 -22 and Rs 279 crore for 2020 -21 released by the Centre (PRANA 2019) . 
Ongoing Initiatives in the city  
The air quality in the city is governed by multiple statutory and regulatory frameworks. Some  
key ones are listed below : 
• Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981  
• Environment Protection Act, 1986  
• Motor Vehicles Act, 1988  
• National Ambient Air Quality Standards, 2009  
• National Green Tribunal Act, 2010  
There are several ongoing initiatives , developed by the national and regional agencies and 
implemented by city - or state -designated nodal agencies in a manner suit ed to their respective 
location s. Below are some key ongoing initiatives categor ised on the basis of  their strategic 
orientation. The broader objectives of these initiatives , and their alignment with  BCAP goals , 
are listed in the table below.  
Table 5 Ongoing initiatives in the air quality sector in Bengaluru  
Strategic Orientation:  Develop best prevention and mitigation strategies to reduce air 
pollution  
Initiatives:  
• State Clean Air Action Plan  
• Smart City Mission (SCM)  
• AMRUT   Objectives:  
These initiatives aim to improve air quality and 
public health by identifying cost-effective measures 
to reduce emissions from sectors such as transport, 
industries, landfills, construction and demolition 
waste, and residential burning.  
Strategic Orientation: Ensuring community health resilience  
Initiatives:  
• Swachh Bharat Mission  
• Swachh Vayu Sarvekshan  
• Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana 
(PMUY)  Objectives:  
These initiatives aim to create awareness and 
inform citizens about health impacts related to 
exposure. They also  help improve facility resilience  
and resource management, while promoting 
equitable access to health services.   
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   80  
Strategic Orientation:  Transition to low -emitting fuel and VOC free products and  
building materials  
Initiatives:  
• FAME Scheme  
• Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana  
• Electric Vehicle and Energy Storage 
Policy , 2017  
• ECBC  
• Eco-Niwas Samhita – Part 1  
• Go Electric campaign - eCooking  
devices  
• National Building Codes (NBC), 2016  Objectives:  
These initiatives promote the clean fuel transition 
in all types of vehicles , with the aim of  reduc ing 
significant exhaust emissions that deplete the air 
quality. They  also encourage citizens to adopt 
sustainable materials for the construction of 
buildings and  to improve indoor air quality and 
occupancy comfort.  
 
Areas of improvement for addressing barriers to betterment of air quality  
1. Air quality monitoring system  
The main criteri on for air quality network density is population . For instance , the  CPCB 
follows the Bureau of Indian Standards (IS 5182 -14 2000) to specify the criteria for deploying 
monitoring stations as one station for every 10 to 20 sq. km. For a city with a complex 
topography or a large number of pollution sources , one station per 5-10 sq. km  is suggested  
(ISD 2019) . Considering the standard requirement, Bengaluru city requires at least 36 air 
quality monitoring stations. At p resent , there are 10 CAAQMS and 13 manual stations Thus, 
the city is short of 13 CAAQMS , and needs  to transition all 13 manual monitoring stations to 
CAAQMS.  
2.  Emission s inventory and source apportionment studies  
For a fast-growing city like Bengaluru, emission s inventory and source apportionment studies 
need to be carried out at regular interval s to capture emission trends. It is essential to study 
emission trends every five years to develop effective local ised actions and mitigation measures 
in keeping with the city’s dynamics  (CSTEP 2022) . The studies should also focus on the need 
for hyperlocal or neighbourhood -level monitoring of air quality.  Use of air quality dispersion 
models can help assess the impact on air quality from new economic developments.   
3. Indoor air quality management  
Currently, India does not have indoor air quality (IAQ) standards/guidelines like  the ones for  
ambient air quality standards  which could be referred by cities such as Bengaluru . However, 
some components involved in determining indoor air quality are considered in the National 
Building Codes, 2016 (NBC). There are standards and guidelines developed by the  World 
Health Organization (WHO) ; Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) ; and 
the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air -Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE). 
The COVID -19 pandemic has highlighted  the need for better  ventilation and control measures 
for airborne diseases that pose significant health risks , such as  respiratory problems, asthma, 
throat infection, difficulty in breathing, fatigue, headache, eye irritation, and skin diseases  
(Bedi and Bhattacharya 2021) . The degrading indoor air quality and its link with airborne 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   81  
diseases underscore  the urgent need  for India to come up with guidelines on IAQ to assess the 
exposure levels, effective mitigation measures, and promote a healthy lifestyle.  
4. Complete feedback loop and effective cross -stakeholder engagement  
National Clean Air Program me highlights  the importance of collaboration , saying that  tackling 
air pollution requires a combined effort from every stakeholder. Even though most air 
pollution is caused by local sources, it is not limited to a specific city and can cross boundar ies. 
There needs to be a set of guidelines for various  regions in the state to coordinate, and  a 
regional airshed management  cell should be set up to  establish authorities across state 
jurisdictions. There is also a need for some sort o f engagement loop developed among key 
stakeholders that includes performance evaluation of implemented policies or executed, 
rather than just stopping at the proposal and implementation stage . The performance 
evaluation step helps identify underperforming actions and policies , facilit ating decision 
making to remov e or alter the m effectively. Multiple stakeholder engagement reduces the  
possibility of asymmetric al distribution of knowledge and recommendations and of the  
duplication of efforts and resources already invested in a particular action or policy.   
5. Capacity -building of urban local bodies (ULB s) and knowledge support to implement 
and monitor air quality projects under  the NCAP  
CPCB has directed the KSPCB and city authorities to implement the City Action Plan. With 
further directions from CPCB , the city has also prepared a detailed micro -action plan  that lays 
out physical and financial targets. There is a lack of dedicated capacity to look after the overall 
coordination and facilitation of the implementation of the city’s air action plan and more 
importantly to managing the day -to-day activities of the NCAP, including monitoring, 
evaluation, and reporting. Also, there is a need for need -based capacity -building programmes 
with experts having domain knowledge of various aspects of mitig ation relevant to the ULBs.    
2.2.5  Water, wastewater , and storm water management        
Status quo of the sector  
Topographically, Bengaluru is located at the top of a ridge , which is the water divide between 
the watershed of the Cauvery and the Ponnaiyar rivers  (Palanichamy 2022) . The major surface 
water intake point for the city is in the Shivanasamudra section of the Cauvery river, 100 km 
from Bengaluru. This is the only piped water supply source. Currently, the BBMP jurisdiction 
comprises one core city, eight  ULBs, and 110 villages. BWSSB is the agency responsible for 
water supply and sewerage infrastructure and services within the BBMP jurisdiction. BWSSB 
provides a piped supply of about 1 ,450 million litres per day (MLD) of Cauvery water to the 
city, under the Cauvery Water Supply Scheme (CWSS) Stage s I-III, and Stage IV Phase s I and 
II, to the core city and eight  ULBs  (BWSSB website ). Currently, about 40% of the city’s 
population depends on groundwater  (CGWB 2015) . Studies show that there are over 80,000 
private borewells in the city , and groundwater is illegally extracted  through private tanker 
businesses  (Raju et al. 2018) . Over -exploitation , coupled with insufficient recharge , leads to 
water contamination  and a drop in the water table. The city generates  about 1 ,440 MLD of 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   82  
sewage and has  an installed wastewater treatment capacity of 1372.5  MLD within the core city 
and eight ULBs .32  
Bengaluru has primary drains that connect one lake to another , and secondary/tertiary drains 
that channel ise rainwater runoff to primary drains. The CAG report records that the city has a 
total drain length of 842  km (First post  2022) . BBMP is responsible for the maintenance of 
storm water drains and flood management  in the city. Of about  210 lakes in Bengaluru , 167 
lakes fall under BBMP jurisdiction  and the rest are with other departments such as forest dept, 
BWSSB,  and BDA  (BBMP website ). 
Ongoing initiatives in the city  
Water and related sectors in the city are governed by multiple statutory and regulatory 
frameworks. A few key ones are listed below : 
• Water (Prevention and Control) Act, 1974  
• National Water Mission  
• Karnataka State Water Policy , 2019  
• The Karnataka Ground water ( Regulation and Control of Development and 
Management ) Act 
• BWSSB Act, 1964  
• Bengaluru Water Supply and Sewerage (Rainwater Harvesting ) (Amendment) 
Regulation , 2019  
Bengaluru is currently implementing (or planning for) various policies, plans and schemes 
within this sector . Some key initiatives are listed below, categor ised on the basis of their 
strategic orientation. The broader objectives of these initiatives , along with their alignment 
with  the BCAP goals of mitigation, adaptation , and resilience -building , are  listed in the table 
below.  
Table 6 Ongoing initiatives in water, wastewater, and stormwater sector in Bengaluru  
Strategic Orientation:  Access to water supply and services  
Initiatives:  
• Cauvery Water Supply Scheme 
Stage -V (775  MLD)  
• Refurbish and Rejuvenate TG 
Halli Reservoir City Logistics 
Plan  Objectives:  
These initiatives aim to augment  the city’s water supply 
by allotting water to the peripheral areas that do not have 
piped water supply. The initiatives  contribute to 
enhancing public health, boosting economic productivity, 
promoting environmental sustainability, building 
community resilience, and enhancing  social equity. They 
directly address the adaptation/resilience goal of the 
BCAP.  
Strategic Orientation: Improving wastewater management  
Initiatives:  
• Mandatory dual piping system 
for new constructions  Objectives:  
These initiatives aim to achieve better wastewater 
management through increased treatment of wastewater 
 
32 2019 data shared by BWSSB with  WRI India for the BCAP preparation . 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   83  
• Subline and trunk sewer mines 
construction  
• 128 MLD capacity of new 23 
STPs under construction  
• Phase -wise rehabilitation and 
upgrad es of old or under -
capacity sections of 
wastewater networks and STPs  and segregation of potable and non-potable water , to 
maxim ise the use of available water resources and 
conserve water by reducing the strain o n fresh water 
supplies. The y contribute to improved public health, 
environmental protection, resource recovery, climate 
change mitigation, and community well -being.  
They directly address the adaptation/resilience and 
mitigation goal s of the BCAP.  
Strategic Orientation:  Water conservation strategies  
Initiatives:  
• Property level rainwater 
harvesting  
• Reuse of treated water  
• Implementation of district 
metered areas for water loss 
reduction  Objectives:  
These initiatives aim to increase  water storage and 
availability , to reduce water scarcity during drought. 
Initiative s to reuse treated water would decrease the 
dependency on fresh water for non -potable purposes. 
District metering would help improve the  monitoring of 
the water distribution to reduce leaks in water supply . 
These initiatives contribute to reduced water bills, 
increased water availability, environmental protection, 
energy savings, climate change mitigation, and improved 
community well -being . They directly address the 
adaptation/resilience goal of the BCAP.  
Strategic Orientation: Stormwater management  
Initiatives:  
• Regular desilting of drains  
• Expanding stormwater 
network installation of 26 
water-level sensors by 
KSNDMC  Objectives:  
These initiatives aim to mitigate flood  risk by ensuring 
free stormwater runoff into the drains. Water -level 
sensors help provid e real-time information on water 
levels , which allows the authorities to take necessary 
action on time. These  initiatives  contribute to flood 
prevention, improved water quality, increased 
groundwater recharge, climate change adaptation, green 
infrastructure, and improved community well -being. 
They directly address the adaptation/resilience goal of 
the BCAP.  
 
Areas of improvement for addressing barriers to a climate -progressive water -wastewater -
stormwater  sector  
1. Managing distribution and loss of water  
The city is heavily dependent on piped Cauvery water supply , and the source is 100  km away 
from the city. This contribut es to the transmission and distribution loss of water , due  to which, 
along with the peripheral areas ( which still lack a  piped water supply network) , some parts of 
the core city still depend on groundwater to meet demand.  Moreover, the high percentage of 
unaccounted -for water (UfW) due to water theft and illegal connections affect s the water 
supply efficiency in the city  (K.S.K . and Raj 2020) . 
2. Ageing infrastructure  
Some of BWSSB’s assets, such as ground level reservoirs, the distribution system , and other 
structures , are more than 50 years old and in need of rehabilitation . Going forward, BWSSB 
will need to focus on upgrading  its ageing infrastructure, while creating new infrastructure in 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   84  
peripheral areas  (BWSSB 2017) . Identifying and locating distribution system leaks can be 
difficult. However, targeting problem areas for repair or replacement is critical for effective 
resource management and water conservation.  
3. Water pricing vs true cost of water  
BWSSB spends substantial portion of its budget on pumping water to Bengaluru.  With rising 
costs, managing the water services of Bengaluru is becoming very expensive. As per BWSSB ’s 
vision document, the monthly power costs for pumping 1,400 MLD of water to Bengaluru are 
around Rs 450 million. To meet the increased demand  for services  and the consequent 
infrastructural expansion requirements, BWSSB depends on government funding , which 
incurs a significant debt burden. With the present tariff structure, BWSSB can only recover its 
operating costs.  
4. Over -exploitation of groundwater   
As per the Central Ground Water Board (CGWB), 40 % of Bengaluru’s  population depends on 
groundwater  (CGWB 2015) . Depleting groundwater tables lead s to a reduction in and drying 
up of groundwater wells. According to a study from  the Indian Institute of Science (IISc), 78% 
of Bengaluru became concret ised in just four decades  (T. Ramachandra 2017) . Studies show 
that only 3 -8% of water reaches the groundwater  (BIOME 2021) . Though the city has 
mandated rainwater harvesting (RWH), enforcement is weak, and not all RWH structures 
recharge aquifers. As mentioned in  the CCRA -VAVA section in Chapter 2 of this report, the 
meteorological drought probability is nearly 50% in the upstream areas of the Cauvery 
showing 20% of drought leading to water stress in the wells.  
5. Diversification of the city’s  water portfolio  
As the city depends  heavily on Cauvery water, extreme weather conditions put pressure on  
water security. For instance, the floods in September 2022 inundated the TK Halli water 
treatment plant and two pumping station units in Mandya district  (Times  Now, 2022) . Due to 
damage to pumping units at the TK Halli water treatment plant, the water supply to 50 areas 
across the city was disrupted (Times  Now 2022) . Bengaluru urgently needs  a diverse water 
portfolio to sustain its economic and societal growth. Water conservation measures such as 
rainwater harvesting need stringent implementation across the city.  
6. Groundwater quality  
The Department  of Mines and Geology 2011, estimates that 31% of groundwater wells water is 
unfit for drinking due to alkaline content , with the pH value ranging from 7.8 to 8.5 . Total 
hardness varies from 100 to 600 mg/l in  shallow and deep groundwater , leading to 
contamination and decreased water tables. Approximately 54% of untreated sewage in the city 
flows into stormwater drains.  
6. Surface run -off management  
The fast pace of built growth in the city over the last two decades has  resulted in concreti sation 
of open areas leading to less scope for seepage of rainwater  to the sub -soil layers. This has led 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   85  
to both  more surface runoff often leading to water logging and floods in different pockets of 
the c ity, and depleting groundwater tables . Moreover, built growth over  stormwater drains, 
flood plains and natural drainage channels carrying water have reduced efficiency of the city’s 
stormwater drainage infrastructure .  
7. Awareness on wastewater reuse and resource recovery potential to promote circular 
economy  
The wastewater treatment facility in the city treats 60% of the city’s sewage  (Ramya 2022) . 
About 60% of treated water is reused for purposes such as minor irrigation, filling up of 
lakes/tanks in Kolar district and Chikkabalapur district, at the KPCL power generation plant 
in Yelahanka, gardening in Lal Bagh, etc.  The remaining  40% is discharged into drains .33 A 
market and complete value chain for wastewater reuse (such as in construction sites)  is not 
established at present.   
2.2.6  Urban planning , greening , and b iodiversity          
Status quo of the sector  
Bengaluru has seen unprecedented growth in the last few decades. Between 2001  and 2011, 
population densities in the BBMP and BMA limits increased by about 46% , from 82  persons 
per hectare ( pph) to 119 pph , and from 47 pph to 70 pph, respectively  (Opencity 2020) . This 
is, however , much lower than URDPFI guidelines , which  suggest a gross population density of 
more than 200 pph  for megalopolises (i.e., cities with a population of over 10 million). 
Bengaluru has , in fact , seen de -densification of its inner -city areas ,34 while most of the growth 
– in both population and urbanised area – has occurred in its outer suburbs and peripheries 
beyond the Outer Ring Road (ORR), spilling beyond municipal and metropolitan limits (see  
Figure 27).35  
Rapid urban isation accompanied by land use/land cover changes and haphazard sprawl in the 
city region have not only led to significant inefficiencies in urban management and gaps in 
service delivery, but also impacted natural infrastructure and ecosystems adversely. This has 
cascading effects and exacerbat es climate change risks for the city. These include increasing 
air pollution and surface temperatures, urban heat islands , and adverse impacts on 
biodiversity, health and productivity; lower recharge poten tial, increasing water scarcity and 
cost of access to water resources; and frequent flooding , causing loss of life and property. 
Furthermore, the livelihoods of local communities dependent on these ecosystems are 
affected , and urban inequ ities  are reinforced or exacerbated, as poor and vulnerable 
 
33 2019 data shared by BWSSB with  WRI India for BCAP  preparation . 
34 In the 2001 –11 decade, population growth rates in most BBMP wards inside the ORR were in the negative, with 
the share of population falling from 69% to 55% in the period. Simultaneously , a positive and  prominent growth 
rate of 118% was seen in outer wards beyond the ORR and peripheral areas (Opencity 2020) . 
35 This has been spurred by development along arterial roads and large -scale projects in far -flung locations, such 
as the International Airport and Special Economic Zones. Growing levels of motor isation, greater availability , and 
affordability of land on the outskirts, combined with lax regulation, have led to the fluid outward spread of the 
city in all directions. Moreover, development in the central and inner -city areas (having the highest infrastructure 
and service levels) is constrained by relatively low buildable limits.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   86  
communities that bear the brunt of these negative outcomes lack the resources to cope with 
stresses and climate shocks  (Goswami et al . 2022) .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: WRI India  analysis  using  World Settlement Footprint (WSF) Evolution 1985 -2015 , German Aerospace 
Center (DLR)   
 
Ongoing initiatives in the city  
The urban planning  as well as  greening and biodiversity sectors are governed by multiple 
statutory and regulatory frameworks. A few key ones are listed below : 
• The Karnataka Town and Country Planning (KTCP) Act, 1961  
Figure 27 Built -up growth of Bengaluru  
Growth of total built -up area in the city -region between 1985 and 2015: 
Municipal limits (BBMP):  192 sq. km.  to 518 sq. km.  (170% increase)  
Metropolitan limits (BDA):  200 sq. km.  to 619 sq. km.  (210% increase)  
Metropolitan region (BMRDA):  273 sq. km.  to 924 sq. km.  (238% increase)  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   87  
• Revised Master Plan , 2015 (RMP 2015) for the Bengaluru Metropolitan Area, prepared 
under the provisions of the KTCP Act, 1961  
• Revised Structure Plan , 2031 (RSP 2031) for Bengaluru Metropolitan Region, prepared 
under provisions of the BMRDA Act, 1985  
• BBMP Act, 2020  
• Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976 and Rules, 1977  
• Karnataka Biological Diversity Rules, 2005, under The Biological Diversity Act, 2002  
Bengaluru is currently implementing (or planning for) various policies, plans , and schemes 
within this sector. Some key initiatives are listed below, categor ised on the basis of their 
strategic orientation. The broader objectives of these initiatives , along with their alignment 
with  the BCAP goals of mitigation, adaptation and resilience building , are listed in the table 
below.  
Table 7 Ongoing initiatives in the urban planning  and g reening and biodiversity sector s in 
Bengaluru  
Strategic Orientation:  Urban planning and development  
Initiatives:  
• Bengaluru TOD Policy, 2022 – approved  
• BMLTA bill, 2022 – approved  
• Revised Master Plan  (RMP)  for Bengaluru 
is under preparation (by BDA)  
• Bengaluru Smart City Mission projects – 
ongoing (by BBMP)  
• Integrated and Sustainable Urban 
Development along Mass Rapid Transit 
Corridors in Bengaluru – ongoing pilot 
project for TOD -MMI planning along 
Metro Blue Line (by DULT and BMRCL)  
• K-100 – ongoing pilot project to 
demonstrate Rajakaluve rejuvenation (by 
BBMP)  Objectives:  
These initiatives aim to restrict haphazard 
sprawling of the city and to optim ise its land 
use/land  cover changes caused due to 
unplanned urbani sation . They also aim to 
achieve land use  transport integration , which 
will help reduc e vehicular trips and minimi se 
travel distances , thereby reducing emissions. 
They address both adaptation/resilience and 
mitigation goals of the BCAP.  
 
 
Strategic Orientation: Greening and biodiversity  
Initiatives:  
• Draft Building Construction Environment 
Management Regulations, 2022  
• Tree Census – ongoing (by BBMP)  
• Plantation Programmes and Tree Canopy 
Management (by BBMP)  
• Greening Urban Area (GUA) Scheme (by 
Forest Department ) 
• Afforestation of Other Areas (AOA) 
Scheme  
• Road -Side Plantation (RSP) Scheme  
• Nagar Van Scheme  
• Environment Department  to map trees to 
identify carbon -neutral areas  Objectives:  
These initiatives focus on increasing and 
improving the city’s existing natural green 
cover and biodiversity. They will help improv e 
the city’s  liveability  and resilience to climate 
hazards and reduc e GHG emissions. Thus , 
they support  the BCAP goals of 
adaptation/resilience and mitigation.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   88  
• Biodiversity Management Committee 
(BMC) constituted  
 
Areas of improvement for addressing barriers to a climate -progressive urban planning, 
greening and biodiversity management  
Urban land use patterns, infrastructure networks , and built form s can strongly influence a 
city’s contribution to climate change as well as its  climate -related risks. Urban planning thus 
plays  a critical role in mitigation and adaptation, to build resilience to risks and reduc e 
vulnerabilities. The city’s g reen cover is not only its carbon sink, but it also supports several 
critical aspects of liv eability , such as improving the microclimate and air quality, acting as a 
sponge for excess stormwater run -off, increasing groundwater recharge , and supporting 
biodiversity. Bio diversity , in turn , is intrinsically connected to the health of ecosystems and 
human well -being. Thus, strategic actions in this sector are fundamental to addressing  climate 
change and prepar ing for a resilient future.  
1. Land use -transport integration and for a compact growth form  
The prevailing RMP 2015’s growth strategy is premised on the ‘compact city’ concept. It aims 
to minim ise urban sprawl by (i) encouraging the development of vacant lands in strategic 
locations, (ii) facilitating mixed uses and densification in designated areas, (iii) promoting 
renewal/redevelopment of older neighbourhoods  in and around the core, and  in derelict 
industrial sites , based on potential. The intent needs to be  adequately supported by holistic 
strategies and robust enabling frameworks.  
The plan offers additional development rights36 by means of additional Floor Area Ratio 
(FAR). The present TOD policy offers a significant opportunity if  supported by adequate 
statutory/regulatory frameworks to enable regeneration  for a meaningful, city -wide land use  
transport integration  and compact growth.  
2. Resource and urban management   
Given the rapid outward spread of the city, the municipal boundary was extended in 2007 . 
This has resulted in increase of use of private vehicles, fossil fuel usage , and groundwater  
extraction . While the demand for water, energy , and transport is growing rapidly along  with 
the population, inequitable access and continued dependence on unsustainable sources or 
means pose a challenge in terms of  the adequate supply of safe, reliable and affordable services 
for the city’s residents. There is a higher concentration of public open spaces, education and 
healthcare facilities within the ORR than beyond it  (Opencity 2015) . 
A 2017 study found that the city has 19 sq. km  of public open space under BBMP parks and 
playgrounds, accounting for  around  3 to 4% of the municipal area37. This translates to per 
 
36 The RMP 2015 permits a FAR between 1.5 and 3.25 for the entire conurbation area, based on land use,  access 
road width , and plot size , with higher provisions for larger plots along wider roads . 
37 A study conducted by Janaagraha ( Janaagraha Open Spaces Survey ) during 2017. 
https://www.janaagraha.org/files/publications/PARKS -PLAYGROUNDS -SCORE -OF-BENGALURU -2017.pdf   
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   89  
capita open space of 2.2 sq . m,  lower than the URDPFI guidelines for the maintenance of basic 
ecosystem services , and thus needs attention .  
3. Affordable housing in safe and accessible locations  
As per  Census  2011  figures, 21% of households were  in ‘liveable’ or ‘dilapidated’ housing (i.e., 
categories other than ‘good’) , and 29% of households occupied  houses without concrete 
roofing, making them susceptible to climate hazards such as high  temperature s, storms , and 
heavy rainfall. At the time, an estimated 1.4 lakh households , or 8.4% of the city’s population , 
(Census 2011)  also lived in slums.  
Urban poor settlements often tend to be located in high -density, congested areas , often  in low -
lying, flood -prone zones, making them most vulnerable to natural and man -made disasters . 
4. Consideration of u rbanisation impacts on natural infrastructure which could 
increase climate risks and vulnerabilities    
A visible outcome of the present form of urban isation (including planned, unplanned, and 
unmanaged urban development) in Bengaluru is the loss of natural infrastructure resources. 
According to one study, between 1992  and 2016, the built -up area within BBMP limits 
increased from 27% to 77%, while the re was a decline  in the  area under vegetation from 46% 
to 7.5%, water  bodies from 2.6% to 1% , and others  (open lands, agriculture ) from 24% to 14.6%  
(T.V.  Ramachandra et al. 2015) . Several other studies conducted for different jurisdictions or 
spatial extents in the city -region and time periods, reveal the same trend  ('District Bengaluru 
Urban, Government of Karnataka | Silicon Valley of India | India ' BUD; Hanjagi 2019; 
Hiremath et al. 2013; Journal 2016; Singh TERI) . The analysis for the 1997 –2017 period shows 
a significant loss of surface water bodies  in the city  region and the overlap between built -up 
area and vegetation loss in Bengaluru ( see Annexure E ). Changes in green cover , from forests 
or plantations/woodlots to agricultural land or manicured urban greens with exotic species, 
also have consequences for the quality and quantity of ecosystem services provided by them  
(Goswami et al. 2022) . 
The increase in paved/concret ised impervious surfaces combined with a decline in blue, green , 
and other permeable open spaces, and tree cover, has had cascading ecological and climatic 
impacts , such as - an increase  in average surface temperatures and urban heat island effects, 
affecting  the local climate  (Shridharan 2021) .38 Reduced infiltration and increased stormwater 
run-off, combined with the encroachment and loss of water bodies  (M. Rao 2020; Shridharan 
2021)  and connecting drainage channels, has not only contributed to increased incidence of 
flooding (even during normal rainfall), but also reduced surface and groundwater availability 
due to lower holding and recharge capacities. The growth of the built -up area over high -value 
recharge zones has had significant impacts on the potential recharge volume, which , combined 
with high abstraction rates , has stressed groundwater resources in Bengaluru (see Annexure 
D).   
 
38 Street trees have been found to reduce air temperature by as much as 5.6°C and road surface temperatures by 
around 27.5°C (T. V. Ramachandra et al. 2015) . 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   90  
5. Number of trees per capita and distribution of green cover  
Over the years, Bengaluru has lost significant number of trees to development, infrastructure 
projects and damage from extreme weather events –a problem compounded by excessive 
concretisation and unscientific pruning. Due to paucity of land within the city limits,  
compensatory afforestation or planting schemes tend to be located far from the original site, 
often in new growth or peri -urban areas, or even other parts of the state  (Correspondent 2021; 
N. 2019) , and effective maintenance and monitoring of survival rates remains an issue. A 2017 
inventory of trees with in BBMP limits found that there are about 1.48 million trees, translating 
to one tree for every seven  persons, while respiratory carbon offset alone requires eight  trees 
per person. There is wide variation in ward -wise tree counts and density, which ranges from 
less than one tree per 500 persons to 1.25 trees per person  ('Green Spaces in Bengaluru ' IISc). 
The absence or loss of tree cover in urban areas adversely  not only  impacts ecosystems and 
public health but also exacerbates climate risks and vulnerabilities.  The BBMP’s Forest Cell 
has begun a tree census , a massive exercise that will require adequate resources to complete 
effectively and expeditiously.  
6. Loss of natural habitats and biodiversity  
Bengaluru’s parks/gardens, natural habitats (including grasslands, hillocks, sacred groves, 
forests, water bodies ), and trees support hundreds of species of flora and fauna. The 
fragmentation, deterioration and loss of blue -green networks/spaces and tree cover in the city  
region, alongside an increase in surface temperatures, are impacting biodiversity. They 
threaten  to wipe out endangered species such as  the slender loris (Rao 2020) , and are  also 
associated with the loss of food, fodder , and livelihoods for certain lower -income and 
marginal ised communities. As per the Biological Diversity Act , 2002, the BBMP had set up 
the Biodiversity Management Committee (BMC), which had prepared Bengaluru’s first 
People’s Biodiversity Register (PBR) way back in 2009.  The BBMP reconstituted a new BMC 
in January 2020 , tasked with the restoration of local biodiversity . 
7. Integration of climate lens in  urban policy, planning and regulatory frameworks  
The key legislation governing urban planning in the state – the Karnataka Town and Country 
Planning Act 1961 – does not mandate assessment of land suitability and carrying capacity, 
environmental and social impacts, and vulnerability to climate/disaster risks. Nor is it explicit 
on the need to protect and integrate natural infrastructure and ris k mitigation  management 
measures into master plans and town planning schemes. Moreover, these spatial plans 
(focused on road networks, land use zoning and development regulations), are not required to 
integrate common city (sectoral/cross -sectoral) goals, targets and strategies, or the  
preparation of GHG  inventories to create baselines and track emissions. As a result, current 
plans/schemes, development regulations, urban design , and infrastructure guidelines and 
standards do not adequately incorporate climate resilience parameters. Project review and 
approval processes such as  environmental clearances also need to be more rigorous. 
Furthermore, the city lacks an integrated spatial database that is periodically updated and 
publicly accessible to track ongoin g activities and improve transparency, accountability, and 
participation.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   91  
8. Governance mechanisms  for urban planning , management and climate action  
These challenges are made more complex by the multiple policies and institutions at the 
national, state, regional and local levels , which are  involved in managing land, development, 
natural resources, and infrastructure. With their own jurisdictions and functional autonomy 
(i.e., governing laws, mandates, plans/schemes and budgets), these agencies currently operate 
in silos, with narrow expertis e and little coordination. This has led to fragmented decision -
making and actions that are also often conflicting , as their  institutional mandates are at odds 
with one another). Furthermore , staff capacities are limited and inadequate for the tasks at 
hand.  
2.2.7  Disaster management         
Status quo of the sector  
Climate change has been causing disasters across the globe , and this  has increased so 
significantly in 2022 that it is  being referred to as the Year of Disasters (Reliefweb 2023; Staff 
2022) . The disasters have been extensive , from the eruption of a volcano in Hawaii to floods 
in Pakistan and India. Bengaluru city has also been subject to its share and more in 2022. The 
end of August 2022 saw excessive rains in the city which is reflected in the datasets published 
by KSNDMC. Bengaluru  Urban District , which normally receives  123 mm of rainfall in August, 
got 332 mm in August 2022, an increase of 170%.  Table 8 gives taluk -wise normal and actual 
rainfall for the month of August 2022  (KSNDMC 2022)  in the BUD region.  As can be observed 
from the table , there is more than a +170 % departure from normal for the month. Such sudden 
extreme events , along with inadequate planning , enhance the loss and damage to people, 
infrastructure and the economy.  
Table 8 Taluk -wise rainfall in August 2022 for BUD region  
Taluk  Rainfall in Aug 2022  Percentage 
departure from 
normal  
Normal in mm  Actual in mm  
Bengaluru North  145.1  280.0  93 
Bengaluru South  135.3  389.8  188 
Bengaluru East  117.6  294.5  150 
Yelahanka  95.2  291.4  206 
Anekal  124.4  363.1  192 
Bengaluru  Urban  123.0  332.0  170 
Source: KSNDMC , 2022  
 
For Bengaluru city, as part of the larger Climate Change Risk and Vulnerability Assessment 
(CCRA -VA), five key plausible climate and environmental hazards have been identified : urban 
flooding , urban heat , drought , thunderstorms and lightning, and air pollution . A detail ed 
approach for the identification of these hazards is discussed  in the  Chapter 2 , along with the 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   92  
impacts.39 For example , a total of 19% of the BBMP area can be tentatively impacted (within a 
250 m radius of flood vulnerable areas ) by the floods , based on KSNDMC data , and with  a 
further increase in intensity and magnitude , further impacts are possib le. The scope of this 
sector in the BCAP is limited to climatic and environmental hazards as detail ed in the CCRA -
VA report. Considering this, there is a need to have adequate planning on actions to be taken 
to reduce the risks of these disasters  with better disaster management and risk reduction 
systems . This could be  via combination with more comprehensive database s on past 
occurrences of disast ers, enabling better predictive analysis and thereby enhancing 
preparedness for such untoward occurrences.  
Ongoing initiatives in the city  
There are multiple statutory and regulatory frameworks for d isaster risk reduction at both 
national and state levels. A few are listed below :  
• The Disaster Management Act, 2005  
• The Disaster Management (National Disaster Response Force) Rules, 2008  
• The Karnataka State Disaster Management Policy, 2020  
• National Disaster Management Plan, 2019  
• Karnataka State Disaster Management Plan, 2020 –21  
• Indian Standard Protection of Buildings and Allied Structures against Lightning Code 
of Practice , 1991  
• Indian Standards on Earthquake Engineering , 1993  
The state of Karnataka has proactively formulated individual plans for climate disasters of 
concern for Bengaluru city. These are summarised  in Table 9 below. Furthermore, t he state  
has individual district -level disaster management plans  (DMPs) for all districts with the 
exception of BUD. In addition, the current state DMP has initiated the preparation of DMPs 
at the panchayat level , which has been completed in approximately 2 ,000 panchayats40. At the 
city level, the  BBMP’s  stormwater drains department is actively working with KSNDMC on 
urban flood models to predict probable areas where flooding could occur in the city and to take 
pre-emptive action.  
Table 9 Ongoing initiatives for disaster risk reduction in Bengaluru  
Strategic Orientation:  Data recording and monitoring  systems  
Initiatives:  
• Rainfall Atlas for Karnataka, 2019  
• District -wise daily, weekly, monthly, 
seasonal and annual reports on rainfall, 
temperature and relative humidity for 
Karnataka  
• Annual reports on earthquake s in 
Karnataka  Objectives:  
These initiatives aim to get an understanding 
of the climatic parameters , i.e., rainfall, 
temperature and relative humidity in 
Karnataka , to help improve  preparedness for 
these clim atic variations.  
The information on earthquakes aims to give 
insight s into locations vulnerable to seismic 
activity for better preparedness across the 
state.  
 
39 Refer to Chapter 2 of this document or the CCRA -VA report . 
40 Personal communication with KSDMA official in November 2022.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   93  
 
Strategic Orientation: Disaster management and risk reduction planning systems  
Initiatives:  
• Climate Change Scenario in Karnataka: A 
Detailed Parametric Assessment , 2020  
• Karnataka State Disaster Management 
Plan – Volume 1 and 2  
• Urban Flood Forecast System  
• Karnataka State Action Plan for Flood 
Risk Management , 2021  
• Heat Wave Action Plan , 2022  
• Lightning Action Plan , 2022  Objectives:  
These state -level assessment and action plans 
aim for better preparedness in the event of 
hazard s, and an action plan during the 
occurrence of the hazard , thereby reducing 
loss and damage , and building faster recovery 
mechanisms.  
Strategic Orientation:  Post -disaster recovery  
Initiatives:  
• Manual on Administration of State 
Disaster Response Fund and National 
Disaster Response Fund  Objectives:  
These initiatives mainly aim to ensure prompt  
post -disaster rescue and relief measures , so 
that the state can recover faster and with 
minimal casualt ies.  
 
 
Areas of improvement for addressing barriers to a climate -progressive disaster 
management system   
 
1. District - or city-level legal policy framework for disaster management  
Cities, especially a megapolis like Bengaluru, need to have a definite plan of action to ensure 
preparedness during disasters. With a risk reduction plan in place, rescue and relief operations 
can be performed smoothly .  When  all the relevant authorities are aware of  the process they 
need to  follow , there are fewer  discrepancies and delays. Currently , BUD does not have a DMP . 
The district does have a Disaster Management Cell to oversee activities related to climate and 
other disasters , including  chemical di sasters  (Citizen Matters  2015) . However , the lack of a 
legal policy framework is still a matter of concern. BUD has five taluks , of which four constitute 
Bengaluru city. The extent of urbanisation and population explosion that the city has seen in 
the 21st century puts a greater number of people at risk. Moreover , the city houses many 
multinational companies  and is the IT hub of the country. The loss of infrastructure potentially 
also translate s to economic loss to the country , and having a  district disaster management plan  
(DDMP ) in place could s ignificantly reduce the loss and damage.  
2. Risk reduction as a n integral part of  the urban planning process  
Currently , urban planning processes primarily take into account population growth and the 
need for housing based on population growth. However, given  Bengaluru’s  high population 
densit y, the planning has to be more extensive and elaborate , incorporating better access to 
services and resources based on URDPFI guidelines . More importantly, in urban  
agglomerations , risk reduction strategies  must be included  in the urban planning process.   
3. Capturing  of micro -level/ local  inputs  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   94  
While overall city-level action plans are an essential tool for appropriate action to be taken 
both from a mitigation or adaptation perspective, the local ised concerns also need to be 
addressed. Bengaluru  has constituted  ward committee s with , representation  from the local 
community,  along with representatives from various  line departments  that provid e services 
such as electricity and water  to the ward. Having such a system  already in place could 
potentially help in understanding these local ised inputs on ward -level concerns , and adequate 
planning  to address these concerns can be initiated. Ward-level inputs on local ised problems 
could give better insights into local problems and build  a resilient disaster risk reduction 
system.  
4. Accessible  decentral ised infrastructure support during disasters  
Time plays a crucial role in reducing loss and damage when a disaster occurs. Having adequate 
decentral ised infrastructure could result in faster response to rescue and relief operations 
during disaster s. During the pandemic , this was addressed to a certain extent , but was limited 
to the pandemic itself. This needs to be expanded across all disasters that the city could 
potentially face. There is also limited access to other support systems , such as  financial  and 
human resources , whose availability could  enable better and more prompt action at the local 
level. Withou t a DDMP  or city-level disaster risk reduction plan, there is limited information 
on the steps to be followed in such situations. Adequate capacity building , along with the 
formulation of a DDMP , could be a first step to wards  address ing these inadequacies.   
5. Coordination between different local departments  
During disasters, essential services  are often disrupted . It has been observed that during 
disasters, there is a power cut or loss of access to potable water. Sometimes sewerage lines are 
also damaged, which could potentially double the consequences in instances like flooding. The 
floods in August 2022, for example, resulted in multiple power interruptions , especially in the 
flooded areas . Prompt action and pre -emptive measures  by appropriate and well -coordinated  
services can substantial ly reduce  the risk.  
6. Access to services and resources  
The CCRA -VA assessment  details the extent of accessibility across different zones of 
Bengaluru  city. One aspect  of concern is the inequitable access to various services across the 
city. Areas lacking in access to basic and critical services and also prone to flooding41, 
experience  a cascading effect  of disasters .  
7. Governance and infrastructure system to assess post -disaster loss and damage  
To ensure faster post -disaster recovery, Bengaluru  needs a protocol for assessing loss and 
damage within a stipulated time , based on the Manual on Administration of State and National 
Disaster Response Fund. The city currently relies on the state -level KSDMA for this . The lack 
 
41 Refer to the CCRA -VA document for detail s on the study.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   95  
of a proactive governance and infrastructure system to assess loss and damage in the  city needs 
to be addressed.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   96  
2.3 Existing governance and institutional structure  
2.3.1 Guiding governance framework  
With the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act, urban local bodies (ULBs) in India were 
empowered to act as institutions of local self -government. The Act  also empowered state 
governments to devolve more power, functions, and funds to ULBs. The ULB governing 
Bengaluru is  BBMP, as per the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike Act, 2020  (BBMP Act, 
2020).  This Act replaced the Karnataka Municipal Corporation Act, 1976 , for the city, as the 
1976 Act  was inadequate to address the admini strative and structural requireme nts of  
Bengaluru42. 
Article 243ZE in the 74th CAA mentions the establishment of a Metropolitan Planning 
Committee (MPC) to manage and plan for larger urban agglomerations. According to this and 
the BBMP Act , 2020, the Metropolitan Planning Committee ha s been set up to prepare a draft  
development plan for  the Bengaluru Metropolitan Area . Two -third s of the members of the 
MPC are elected representatives, in keeping with the principles of  decentralisation and 
subsidiarity. At present, landuse and city development planning exercise is carried out by the 
Bangalore Development Authority (BDA) for the Bangalore Metropolitan Area (BMA).  
2.3.2  City-level functions and responsible agencies  
BBMP has multiple departments housed within itself to carry out its prescribed 
responsibilities. Figure 28 illustrates the departments and subdepartments. Each department 
is headed by Additional/Special Commissioners or their equivalents.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 The BBMP Act, 2020  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   97  
 
Figure 28: Departments of the BBMP  and their functions  
 
Source: Compiled by authors based on information available on BBMP Websites . 
 
The BBMP Act, 2020 gives  the ULB the power and responsibility to prepare and implement 
schemes for the 18 functions provided for in the 74th CAA. In Bengaluru,  various parastatal 
agencies and departments have been carrying out many of the  city functions  relating to service 
delivery . Figure 29 lists relevant sector -wise departments/agencies and their key 
responsibilities. Annexure I lists the roles and responsibilities of various  agencies  and 
departments  with respect to each of the seven sectors discussed in the BCAP.  The presence of 
multiple agencies and associated coordination  requirements make  this a central idea to be 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   98  
addressed through an appropriate governance mechanism for effective implementation of 
BCAP.   
 
Figure 29 Institutional mapping of the sectors considered in the BCAP  
 
Source: WRI India Analysis  
  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   99  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   100  
3 BASELINE ASSESSMENT FOR BENGALURU:  CCRA -VA AND GHG 
INVENTORY  
3.1 Climate Change Risk  and Vulnerability Assessment  (CCRA -VA) 
3.1.1 Objective and components of CCRA -VA 
The Climate Change Risk and Vulnerability Assessment ( CCRA -VA)43 for Bengaluru was 
carried out  as part of the BCAP in an attempt  to understand the key areas  that the city needs 
to focus on , in order to  enhance its adaptive capacity and build resilience against climate 
change risks , as seen through  the combined lens of  human s, nature  and the economy. The 
following sections summarise  the key findings of the CCRA -VA. The overall approach adopted 
for this assessment is a combination of two frameworks, namely the Climate Change Risk 
Assessment (CCRA) (Cities 2018b)  framework developed by C40, and the Climate Hazard 
Vulnerability Assessment ( CHVA) framework developed by the WRI India.  
Risk assessment, the final output of the CCRA -VA report , refers to  the “scientific estimation 
of risks from a qualitative and/or quantitative perspective , keeping into account the previously 
mentioned factors impacting risk” (Fifth Assessment Report — IPCC 2014) . A schematic of the 
framework applied to assess risk is depicted in Figure 30.  
Figure 30 Parameters used for Vulnerability and  Risk Assessment  
 
Source:  WRI India, adapted from C40’s CCRA Framework and WRI India’s CHVA Framework  
 
 
 
 
43 A detailed report - Climate Change Risk and Vulnerability Assessment has been prepared under BCAP and can 
be accessed along with this report  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   101  
The following sections summarise  these components of climate change risk assessed for 
Bengaluru:  
• Past and future trends of key climatic parameters for Bengaluru leading to 
identification of climate hazards  
• Analysis  of each hazard to understand their likelihood and magnitude  
• Exposure of Bengaluru to the identified hazards at a sub -city level  
• Vulnerabilities of the city and its residents  determin ing 
•  the extent of impact that Bengaluru is likely to face from those hazards.  
3.1.2 Climate trends in Bengaluru and adjoining regions: Recent past and future 
scenarios  
For Bengaluru, temperature and precipitation are the two major climat ic parameters that 
assume greater relevance , and hence the CCRA -VA focus es on the m. The section is sub -
divided into recent past trends  and future scenarios . Detail s of the methodology used , data 
sources, description of assessments , and key findings are discussed  in Chapter  3 of the CCRA -
VA report. The f ollowing sections present a summary of the same.   
Recent past trends for rainfall and temperature in Bengaluru  
The long -term inter -annual variations in rainfall were observed for the period 1985 -2020, 
using  the Indian Meteorological Department’s (IMD) daily gridded rainfall data. It was 
observed that the mean annual rainfall in Bengaluru is approximate ly 790 mm  since 1985 as 
seen in  Figure 31. 
Source: WRI India analysis based on  IMD gridded rainfall data ; accessed July 2022  
 
  
Air temperature trends were analysed from 1975 to 2021 , using the National Center  for 
Environmental Information  (NCEI ) data to assess the annual variations. The mean air 
temperature  in Bengaluru  has been rising at 0.23°C per decade (0.023°C per year) since 1975 , 
as seen in  Figure 32. 
 Figure 31 Inter -annual average accumulative rainfall between 1985 and 2020  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   102  
 
 
 
 
Source: WRI India  analysis based on  meteorological data from NCEI; accessed July 2022  
 
Climate projections using RCP Scenarios  
The u nderstanding of future scenarios was based on projections made by a number of  
Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) models available for Bengaluru  and the 
adjoining region for the short term (2070) and long term (2100).  These projections have 
considered a larger area of Bengaluru and its adjoining area , covering the Cauvery Ponnaiyar 
basin region ( as shown in  Figure 8). 
Assessment:  The assessment focuses on the future projected changes for RCP 4.5 and 6  
scenarios44, for the short  term (2021 to 2050) and long term (2071 -2100 ) respectively.  The 
historical baseline is observed from 1987 to 2016 aligned with the analysis followed in 
Karnataka State Action Plan for Climate Change ( KSAPCC )45 2021 - Version 2. These  time 
periods  set the basis for comparing the extent of change in the climatic parameters and are 
also spatial ly represent ed for the  projected changes in precipitation  using select models. 
Additionally, the continuous projected time -series is util ised to study the overall 80 -year -long 
patterns and fluctuations in the climatic parameters.  
Contributing  parameters : Minimum and m aximum temperature as well as precipitation have 
been analysed. The positive deviation  from the baseline is expressed as +↑depicting increase  
and the  negative  deviation is expressed by -↓depicting decrease from the baseline.  
Key findings46: 
 
44 RCP  scenarios  have been extensively used in climate research . The  two mid -range scenarios , RCP 4.5 and 6 , 
project the CO 2 equivalent concentrations  by end of the century  to reach stabil isation without overshoot . 
45 KSAPCC , or the  Karnataka State Action Plan for Climate Change , is the primary policy do cument for the state 
of Karnataka as mandated under the National Action Plan for Climate Change where  each state needs to have a  
strategic action plan. 
46 Analysis uses NASA Earth Exchange Global Daily Downscaled Projections (NEX -GDDP) for RCP 4.5, CMIP5 
daily data for RCP 6, ECMWF ERA5 daily data for historical baseline. Refer to CCRA -VA document for details.   
Figure 32 Inter -annual mean air temperature between 1975 and 2021  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   103  
Minimum air temperature : For the horizon year of the CAP and the short -term period, based 
on RCP 4.5 analysis, by 2050, it is projected to increase  from the baseline up to +↑12%  for 
the BBMP  area , with the highest  positive change being projected for BBMP limits. For RCP 6, 
the BBMP is projected to have heightened variation from the baseline , ranging up to +↑46% 
in the long  term.  
Maximum air temperature : As per RCP  4.5, for the entire 80 -year period, the highest projected 
increase in the temperature is around  +↑12%  across  the entire study area . As per RCP 6, the 
percentage of projected positive change for the BBMP appears to be the most dramatic 
amongst all , rising by nearly +↑37%  through  the long  term.  
Rainfall : The overall study area is projected to have both rainfall deficit and intensification  
under different models  for the study period (RCP 4.5: -↓54% to +↑142%, RCP 6: -↓89% to 
+↑236%), so the region will need to be prepared for the likely impact of both . Most of the 
models  result  in a periodic increasing/ decreasing pattern of rainfall indicating lack of 
consensus. Results from rainfall projections, variations and direction of change, along with 
average rainfall changes, lack accuracy and consistency amongst models for both RCP 4.5 and 
RCP 6 as rainfall is highly seasonal and subject to local conditions. However, all  models largely 
point indicate an increase in the extent of variation leading to greate r possibilities of both 
wetter and drier periods.  
3.1.3 Assessment of Climate Hazard s for Bengaluru  
For Bengaluru, five key climate and environmental hazards have been identified. These are: 
a) Urban flooding , b) urban heat, c) Thunderstorms and lightning , d) Drought, and e) Air 
pollution . These are de scribed in detail in Chapter  4 of the CCRA -VA report. Below is a 
summary of the same.  
Urban flooding  
The assessment of urban flooding  is based on analysing  two parameters: rainfall pattern , 
including extreme rainfall events  (intensity, duration, and frequency analysis ) and 
identification of areas at risk of flooding . 
Based on IMD classification of 24 -hour accumulated rainfall, Bangalore Urban District (BUD) 
experienced 282 Heavy and 14  Very Heavy rain events per year on average between 2016 and 
2021. These rainfall events contributed to nearly  11%, of the  total annual average rainfall 
received in the area for the study period.  Most heavy rainfall events are observed in the western 
part of the region, within the Cauvery Basin. Moreover, it is observed that more than 90% of 
the rainfall events experienced in the city rang e from  very light to moderate, while the 
frequency of heavy rainfall events (sum of rather heavy, heavy and very heavy events) is 
around 6%. Based on data from all 184 stations in the BUD between 2016 and 2021 , very heavy 
to heavy events were mostly observed for a day , with rare occurrences of two days, while nearly 
40% of moderate rain events lasted three  or more days.  Spatial distribution of days of 
consecutive (lasting two days or more) of rather heavy or moderate rainfall shows a high 
concentration in the Vrishabhavathi Valley within BBMP  limits . Based on the observed rainfall 
patterns , and the data on flood -vulnerable hotspot areas provided by KSNDMC, it was 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   104  
analysed that a total area of nearly 180 sq. km.  in the city is at risk of floods which hosts nearly 
21% of the city’s population. Based on the composites of various inundation extents, flood risk 
in the city is categorised  into High, Medium, and Low risk zones  containing about 6%, 4% and 
11% of the population, respectively  (Figure 33). 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   105  
Source: WRI India analysis using topography from SRTM, rainfall from IMD (refer to CCRA -VA report for details)  
Figure 33  Flood risk zones in Bengaluru city  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   106  
 
Urban heat 
The assessment of urban heat risk has been carried out  by analysing  air temperature 
anomalies and trends, heat wave incidents, heat index using NCEI datasets from the 1975 to 
2021 , and hotspot identification using Land Surface Temperature (LST) data . 
Bengaluru ’s mean air temperature has been rising at 0.23°C per decade (0.023°C per year) 
since 1975 . The increase is more profound in the last decade, at nearly half -a-degree per 
decade. A heat wave is an extended period of hot weather relative to the usual  conditions in 
the area at that time of the year. IMD classifies this potentially fatal air temperature condition 
as a heat wave or severe heat wave based on the magnitude of departure above the long -term 
normal beyond a certain threshold47. Extreme heat wave incidents are increasing in the city, 
resulting in  increased spending by the city’s residents  on air conditioners and electricity48. The 
number of heat waves has been peaking in the recent year, for example , it was  the highest in 
2014 and 2015 . In addition, every two years since 1975, the city has been facing an additional 
1.5 ‘caution’49 days  of high heat index . Heat index  is a critical factor in human thermal comfort, 
heat index, confirms that the body’s natural cooling mechanism – evaporation of perspiration 
– is effectively diminished when relative humidity in air increases resulting in dire heat 
disorders.  In 2014 and 2015 , Bengaluru residents spent nearly half of the year under the 
‘caution ’ marker , along with occasional ‘extreme caution ’ days.  
The urban heat island (UHI) p henomenon can be spatially understood through l and surface 
temperature (LST) variations. LST is the radiative skin temperature of the land derived from 
solar radiation. There is a  widening  gap between urban and rural areas  in terms of the rise of 
night -time LST , over the last two decades , wherein average LST has increased  by more than 
1.5°C. As shown  in Figure 34, areas with well -planned residential layouts such as Jayanagar,  
Koramangala, and Indiranagar  have relatively lower  LST ( generally  between 32 -33°C), while 
areas such as  Peenya, Hebbal, and Nagarabhavi  towards the periphery , and Chik kapete (a 
dense old core city  area ) have higher LST of about 35 -36°C.  
 
47 A heat wave is declared  if the departure of the  maximum temperature of a station  from the long -term average is 
4.5°C to 6.4°C . A severe heat wave is declared when the departure is more than 6.4°C. Heat Wave, IMD, accessed 
August 2022. (IMD Heatwaves)   
48 Every two years , city residents have been enduring  1.5 more day s of extreme heat wave s since 1975 . 
49 As per the US National Weather Service ,, caution and extreme caution are advised when the heat index is 
greater than 26 °C and 32 °C respectively. For more details on its impacts , refer to CCRA -VA report.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   107  
 
Source: WRI India analysis using Landsat -8, USGS/ NASA (refer to CCRA -VA report for details)  
Figure 34 Average land surface temperature over  built areas of the city (summer months 2017 -2021)   

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   108  
Drought   
At the city level, d rought  is usually disregarded. However, the re is an  inter -connectedness 
between  drought at a larger regional level  and the availability of  water resource s that  enhanc e 
water security in the city . This is more pertinent for a city like Bengaluru, which  is high ly 
dependen t on the Cauvery river basin for its water supply . With reduced access to conventional 
piped water supply, there is an increas ing dependency on groundwater  (GW) . The city and its 
adjoining area , for the same reasons, have  been categorised as an ‘overexploited zone’ with 
respect to groundwater availability by the Central Ground Water Board. Such dependency on 
GW sources leads to significant  damage to  aquifer -system often leading to compaction, by the 
impact of the superimposed load leading to consolidation of ground matter. Meteorological 
drought probability and drought risk has been assessed to understand the drought scenario in 
Bengaluru.  
Meteorological Drought probability : Meteorological drought is classified based on rainfall 
deficiency in an area with respect to long term average, that is ≥ 26% deficiency. Based on the 
IMD dataset for the period  from  1985  to 2020 , nearly  50% of the area upstream to Cauvery 
(confluence region for the r iver) has a drought probability of more than >20%  (that  is 20% 
chance of drought ).  
Drought risk: Drought risk is an adduced composite of hazard, exposure, and vulnerability 
based on WRI’s Aqueduct 3.0.  84% of the Cauvery -Ponnaiyar  Basin  area is in the ‘ very high 
risk’ category  for drought . Additionally, the region also falls in the ‘ extremely high risk’ 
category of overall water risk  (India 2021)  which posits a challenge for the region’s food, water 
and economic sustainability.  
Groundwater Recharge Potential (GRP):  Examination of GRP provides  a spatially granular 
measure  to identify  areas that have lost the potential  to hold stormwater and help it infiltrate  
naturally . In the year 2000, 63% of the city’s area  is estimated had already been developed/ 
concretised , that is, it holds no natural potential to recharge groundwater.  Between 2000 to  
2020, a further of 31% of the  city’s  area is assessed to have decline in GRP . 
Change in GW levels over time : An assessment of changes in GW levels and quality has been 
done . The m ajority of the observation wells within BBMP limits , seasonally,  show a decline in 
the groundwater level  between 1993 -2021 . Especially towards the periphery, as seen in the 
case of Singasandra and Varthur stations, groundwater levels reported  decline of  nearly one 
metre. Outside BBMP limits, towards the rural areas of Nelamangala, Channapatna, Anekal, 
along the Arkavathi  river,  and around Devanahally, nearly 70% of the observation wells show  
a decline in groundwater levels during the pre-monsoon season.   
GW quality : For most of the observation wells,  Nitrates and pH values were observed to be 
within the permissible limits  for the areas within the BBMP limits  – except for the ones in 
Gottigere , Begur and Peenya . Total hardness (TH) , was observed to be higher than the BIS 
prescribed limits  for the observation wells within BBMP  – in the areas Rajajinagara, 
Malleshwaram, Gollahalli, Kodigehalli, Vasanthapura,  and Gottigere . 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   109  
Stage of Groundwater Development50: The current stage of groundwater development  in 
more than half of BMRDA , including the BBMP limits, for 2020, is defined as ‘ over exploited’ 
(See Figure 35). This means  that the region annually drafts groundwater at a rate higher than  
the resources available for human -consumption.  
 
50 As per the m ethodology recommended by the Ground Water Resource Estimation Committee 2015  (CGWB 
2015) , ‘Stage of Ground Water Development ’ is computed considering the net annual Groundwater availability  
and gross annual draft and the water level trend of the area, thus getting the average stage of development . Taluk 
Wise Categorisation , Dynamic Groun dwater Resources of Karnataka. Groundwater Directorate , Minor Irrigation 
and Groundwater Development Department. Government of Karnataka & Central Ground Water Board . 2022 . 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   110  
 
Figure 35: Taluk level Stage of Groundwater Development  (Groundwater extraction rate to recharge 
rate ) for Bengaluru Metropolitan Region  
Source: WRI India analysis using taluk -level groundwater  statistic s for Karnataka for 2020 , from Central Ground 
Water Board (CGWB)  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   111  
 
Thunderstorm and lightning  
There is paucity of d ata on i ncidences of thunderstorm s for Bengaluru and the adjoining 
region . Therefore, th understorms incident data  for Karnataka state have been referred  for the 
study . In the 49 years (1969 -2017) of thunderstorms  analysed , it is observed that on average , 
in a year , the city gets 44 days of thunderstorm s, with an average durability of 86  hours and 
15 min utes  annually . The highest number of thunderstorm days (62) was observed in three 
years , i.e., 1977, 1991 and 2017 , whereas the lowest (22) was observed in 1990  (KSDMA51, 
Agnihotri, Venugopal, and Hatwar 2013) . 
KSDMA , in its Lightning Action Plan 2022 , notes that  the incidents of lightning across India 
have been increasing , and that  Karnataka state is no different. According to lightning 
distribution data on India , studied by IMD for the period between  April 2020 and March 2021, 
parts of southwestern Karnataka are vulnerable to cloud to ground (C-G) thunderstorm and 
lightning (T&L) strikes . This  has greater  potential  to harm people  and property than other 
forms of lightning . Moreover, in 2021 -22, Karnataka saw a 68.74% rise in lightning strikes , as 
per the Annual Lightning Report of 2021 -22 (IMD 2021) .   
Air pollution  
Anthropogenic air pollution is one of the biggest public health hazards worldwide , account ing 
for about 7 million premature deaths per year. Air pollution has a direct relation to several  
human and environmental health threats , which are compounded by the rising temperature. 
Bengaluru is one of 48 cities that are signatories  to the “Clean Air Accelerator ”, and is taking 
action to tackle the main sources of air pollution. Through this accelerator, the city plans to  
priorit ise cleaning the air by developing a  diverse range of high -impact actions – from 
expanding  air pollution monitoring networks to implementing low -emission zones, 
electrifying bus fleets, and shifting away from polluting fuels for heating.  
Air pollution analysis  is broadly  classified into outdoor and indoor air pollution  assessment . 
While outdoor air pollution is monitored through national missions and the use of sensors, 
indoor  pollution  can only be estimated based on household data  of fuel  and housing type. 
Indoor air pollution analysis is conducted based on the Census of India, 2011, National Sample 
Survey, 2013 -14 and Human Index Survey, 2012 data.  Both components of pollution analysis 
are critical in determining exposure rates and associated human hea lth impacts  (Leung 2015) .  
Outdoor pollution : The key findings of the different pollutants  studied for outdoor pollution 
are summarised  in Table 10. While most Particulate Matter and Nitrogen Dioxide 
concentrations remain ed significantly higher for a considerable number of stations 
throughout the study period, other gaseous pollutants were  predominantly below CPCB 
thresholds.  The table 10 therefore  provides summary of Pm10, PM2.5, and NO2 
concentrations in the city.  
 
 
51 Karnataka State Thunderstorm & Lightning Action Plan 2022 ; KSDMA  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   112  
Table 10 Key observations of air pollutants for Bengaluru  city 
Parameter  Key observations  
PM10  Based on monitoring station data, b etween 2016 and 2021, overall annual averages 
for PM10 in the city vary between 60 and 123 µg/m3.  
 
Hotspot identification:  Out of a total of 10 Continuous Ambient Air Quality 
Monitoring Stations ( CAAQM ) stations and 8 National Air Quality Monitoring 
Programme ( NAMP ) manual stations studied, those in/around Majestic, Silk 
Board, Jayanagar 5th Block , and Hebbal  show  higher PM10 concentrations 
throughout the study period . PM10 concentrations are observed to be highest from  
October to May  each year.  
PM2.5  Based on monitoring station data from  2016 to 2021, the city’s overall annual 
averages for PM2.5 do not show much variation (apart from the Covid year) , and 
remain bordering  the CPCB permissible limits (between 30 -40 µg/m3 per year on 
average) . 
 
Hotspot identification:  Bapuji Nagar, Jayanagar 5th Block, and Peenya are stations 
that crossed the daily CPCB permissible limit for more than one -third of 2021 , at 
58%, 36% and 34%, respectively . Like  PM10, PM 2.5 concentrations are also  the 
highest from October to May  each year . 
NO 2 The a nnual average for NO 2 for most  stations in the city from  2016  to 2021 remain s 
below the CPCB permissible limit , at an average of 26.3 µg/m3, that is , nearly 0.6 
times the CPCB permissible limits.  
 
Hotspot identification:  Bapuji Nagar, Hebbal, and Silk Board stations recorded a  
higher number of days of exceedance compared to the rest of the stations . 
 
Gaseous pollutants  like sulphur dioxide , carbon monoxide and ozone were also studied , and 
are discussed  in the CCRA -VA document. Data for these pollutants is considerably noisy , with 
a lot of gaps , due to which assessment results may vary. The analysis for these pollutants 
focused on the number of days of exceedance  of CPCB permiss ible limits  in 2021 . Sulphur 
dioxide was significantly below the CPCB permissible limits  from 2016 to 2021, with negligible 
days of exceedance  in 2021 . Carbon monoxide has been crossing CPCB permissible limits for 
the stations at BTM Layout, City Railway Station (Majestic) and Bapuji Nagar , for more than 
78%, 57% and 24% respectively  in 2021. Ozone  remain ed high er than the eight -hourly CPCB 
permissible limits  for some areas in the city , including  Hombegowda and Bapuji Nagar , in 
2021,  especially between 10am and 4pm (the hotter part  of the day ), as the temperatures 
during the day  favour  ozone formation .  
Indo or pollution : Of all the types of cooking fuel, firewood , utilised by just 4% of households  
in the city , contributes the most to the  concentration of PM2.5. Households at risk of exposure 
to indoor pollution due to the most polluting cooking fuel (firewood and chips), are 
predominantly  located in the ¬wards of Nayandahalli, Jakkuru and Kuvempu Nagar, as per 
Census 2011.  Further, under the current policy landscape and projected population and 
economic growth, ambient PM2.5 levels in Bengaluru is  projected to increase to 45.9 μg/m3 
by 2050, exceeding national air quality standards and resulting in air that contains 9  times the 
concentration of air pollution that the WHO deems safe.  Table 11 gives an overall scenario of 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   113  
various  hazards , along with likelihood of occurrence in the city and sectors relevant to the 
hazard.  
Table 11 Likelihood of identified hazards and significant  associated sectors  
Hazard  Likelihood of 
occurrence  Sectors  of significance  
Urban flooding  High  Primary sectors : storm water management , 
urban planning , greening and biodiversity  
 
Other sectors : water and wastewater, solid waste 
management, transport , energy  
Urban heat Medium  Primary sectors : urban planning , greening and 
biodiversity  
 
Other sectors : transport , energy , solid waste 
management , water and wastewater  
Drought  Medium  Primary sectors : water and wastewater , urban 
planning , greening and biodiversity   
 
Other sectors : storm water management , 
transport , energy  
Thunderstorm and 
lightning  Medium  Primary sectors : stormwater management , 
urban planning , greening and biodiversity   
 
Other sectors : water and wastewater, transport , 
solid waste management , energy  
Air pollution  Medium  Primary sectors : transport , urban planning , 
greening and biodiversity , solid waste  
management  
 
Other Sectors: energy  
 
The table below identifies the impact of climate hazards on each of the sectors.  
Table 12 Impacts of climate hazards on various  sectors  
Hazards 
impacting 
the sector  Impact of the hazard on sector’s 
infrastructure  Impact of the hazard on 
sector’s services  
Sector: Energy  
Urban 
flooding, 
thunderstor
ms and 
lightning  • Submergence of substations due to 
flooding.  
• Uprooting of poles supporting 
transmission and distribution lines.  
• Extreme storm events damage 
generation and grid infrastructure.  • Loss of electricity leads to loss 
of life due to disruption of 
medical supply chains.  
• Loss of electricity disrupts 
traffic management systems  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   114  
• Revenue and financial losses due to 
damage incurred.  • Loss of electricity will disrupt 
IT services.  
• Loss of electricity affects 
emergency response.  
• Disruption of energy suppl y 
impact s the local economy.  Increase in 
land 
surface 
temperatur
e and heat 
island effect  • Increase in air temperature will 
reduce power plants' generation 
efficiency and output.  
• Heatwaves impact transmission line 
efficiency, and overheating leads to 
the expansion of transmission lines 
and can cause them to slack.  
• Revenue and financial losses due to 
damage incurred.  
Drought  • Drought impacts hydropower 
generation and reduces water 
availability for cooling purposes to 
thermal and nuclear power plants.  
• Revenue and financial losses due to 
damage incurred.  
Sector: Building  
Urban 
flooding , 
thunderstor
m, and 
lightning  • Flooding damages property , as 
prolonged contact with water can 
compromis e walls and material 
strength .  
• Revenue and financial losses due to 
damage  incurred . • Financial losses to owners  
Increase in 
land 
surface 
temperatur
e and heat 
island effect  • Heatwaves impact building and 
infrastructure performance by 
diminishing indoor thermal comfort.  
• Revenue and financial losses due to 
damage incurred .  
 • Increase in temperature 
increases the demand for 
electricity and affects the 
stability and frequency of the 
grid load.  
• Higher urban temperatures 
place unequal economic stress 
on residents and households 
through higher utility demand.  
Sector: Transport  
Urban 
flooding , 
thunderstor
ms and 
lightning  • Damage to transport infrastructure 
(bus stops, buses, roads, waiting 
sheds)  
• Damage to electrical equipment  
• Inundation  of and damage to 
underground transit system 
(subways, underpass es) 
• Financial losses to infrastructure 
owners  • Impassable road network s, 
causing traffic disruptions, 
traffic congestion and accidents  
• Increase in travel time  
• Increase in travel distance (due 
to change in routes)  
• Decrease in average  travel 
speed  
• Power outages disrupting 
services (metro)  
• Financial losses to service 
operators  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   115  
Increase in 
land 
surface 
temperatur
e and heat 
island effect  • Heat -related deterioration of vehicle 
parts ( e.g., engine , tyres) 
• Overheating of signalling  and 
communication systems  
• Increase in energy use for cooling  
• Increased financial burden to 
Transport operators and 
infrastructure owners  
 • Vehicle schedules affected due 
to overheating of engines, 
signalling and communication 
systems, etc.  
• Health and safety risk to 
passengers, operators, staff  
• Shift in demand to other modes 
(PT and NMT to private ) 
• Financial losses to service 
operators  
Drought  • Potential for service disruption if soil 
shrinkage cause s damage to 
roads/tracks  • Damage to transport 
infrastructure (vehicle parts)  
Sector: Solid waste management  
Urban 
flooding , 
thunderstor
ms • Damage  to infrastructure (roads, 
waste collection centres, etc.)  
• Clogging of drains  
• Water infiltration leads to overflow 
in landfills  
• Damage to sanitary landfill facilities 
due to saltwater infiltration  
• Financial losses to infrastructure 
providers  
• Degraded landfills causing 
contamination  • Health and p roductivity of 
workers  
• Blockage of waste collection 
routes  
• Extreme odour and exposure 
to flies , lead ing to the risk of 
infectious  
diseases/mortality/morbidity 
among workers and 
vulnerable groups exposed to 
waste landfills/dump sites.  
• Financial losses to service 
operators . 
Increase in 
land 
surface 
temperatur
e and heat 
island effect  • Alter ed waste decomposition rate in 
the landfill.  
• Increased waste collection 
schedules . 
• Reduces waste collection workers’ 
productivity . 
• Financial losses to service operators . • Increased risk of fire in 
landfills . 
• Heat -related deterioration of 
collection vehicles and dry 
waste recycling facilities . 
• The increased financial 
burden on operators and 
infrastructure owners . 
Sector: Water and wastewater  
Urban 
flooding , 
thunderstor
ms and 
lightning  • Damage to water infrastructure . 
• Floods in September 2022 
inundated the TK Halli water 
treatment plant and two pumping 
station units in Mandya district.  
(Times  Now 2022)  • Disruption of water services 
due to damage to the 
infrastructure . 
• Due to damage to pumping 
units at the TK Halli water 
treatment plant, 50 areas 
across the city were affected , 
as water supply was halted for 
a couple of days. (Times  Now 
2022)  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   116  
Drought  • Depleting water table , leading to a 
reduction in  the water level, or to the  
drying up , of wells . • Shortage of water supply from 
borewells , and a need to rely 
on private water suppliers 
who charge exorbitant  rates . 
Sector: Storm water management  
Urban 
flooding , 
thunderstor
ms and 
lightning  • Damage to SWD infrastructure  
• Reduced carrying capacity of SWD s 
due to encroachments, sewage 
inflow , and solid waste dump ing. 
 • Financial loss due to the 
reconstruction of SWD 
networks.  
 
Ineffective planning and implementation of efficient strategies in sectors such as urban 
planning , greening , biodiversity, and disaster management can act as a contributor to almost 
all the above -mentioned hazards , along with being impacted by them. Deteriorating  air quality  
is also an impact that is caused due to activities across sectors.  
This section detailed the Climate Hazard assessment for key hazards identified for Bengaluru 
along with their  plausible implications. The following  section present s hazard impact 
assessment for Bengaluru as a function  of two components: exposure and vulnerability.  
3.1.4  Climate Hazard Impact Assessment for Bengaluru  
Exposure to climate hazards  
This is the first component of  understanding hazard impact. The area and population exposed 
was assessed for three of th ose hazards , i.e., flooding, urban heat , and air pollution. Hazard 
exposure is presented here in terms of a ward’ s order of priority,  which indicates  the wards 
that have a greater  area , or a higher number of people or assets  are subject to frequent climate 
hazards . Therefore, these  have higher exposure than others . The order of priority ranges  from 
1 to 3, where 1 signifies that a greater  number of elements exposed , compared to 3 . 
Peripheral zones such as  Yelahanka in the North, Mahadevapura in the East  and RR Nagar  in 
the South west, come under the first order priority (exigency of action needed) for both 
flooding and urban heat. Most wards in Bommanhalli zone in the Southern peripheral region 
of Bengaluru  come under medium to high priority for two of the three hazards , i.e., flooding 
and urban heat. Wards such as  Shakthiganapati Nagar  and Subhash Nagar in the West zone, 
Atiguppe in the South zone , and Devarajeevanahalli in the East zone come under high priority 
for air pollution. Certain wards in RR Nagar  like Kottigepalya and Jnanabharathi, come under 
medium to high priority across all these three hazards.  Figure 36 gives spatial  representation 
of priority -based hazard exposure  across Bengaluru.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   117  
 
Bengaluru ’s Vulnerabilit y to climate hazards  
Vulnerability  is the second component for understanding hazard impact . It has an inverse 
relationship with adaptive capacity  and is directly proportional to sens itivity . The vulnerability 
of a city and its population is influenced by a range of fundamental and underlying factors that 
operate at various scales, encompassing individuals, communities, and the entire city.  
Analysis of key parameters across these different layers gives a more comprehensive 
understanding of vulnerabilities at a granular spatial scale (either the ward or the zone level). 
The vulnerability analysis conducted consists  of various demographic  and socio -economic  
parameters as part of sensitivity  – refer to Figure 12 for findings ; and infrastructure and 
accessibility -related parameters as part of adaptive capacity  – refer to Figure 13 and Figure 15 
for results . 
Source: WRI India analysis using Census 2011, Built footprint from WSF 2019 and amenities from BBMP 
2022; details in CCRA -VA report  
 Figure 36 Summarising order of priority based on hazard exposure - Surface flooding, urban heat and 
air pollution  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   118  
3.1.5 Summarising Bengaluru ’s Climate Hazard Risk and Vulnerability Assessment    
Climate hazard risk assessment is theorised as function of both climate  hazard and its impact  
as explained in Figure 30.  Risk assessment is illustrated at the ward and zone level annotated 
by the exigency of action needed ( order of priority ). It brings a comparative interpretation of 
different areas within the city that contain and operate on these parameters  and can be 
theor ised as ‘risk’ . CCRA -VA does not conclude risk informed by vulnerability with a 
quantitative score, as ‘ vulnerability’ is a relative measure.  
CCRA -VA presents the findings in a manner that can help policymakers, implementers, and 
citizen platforms decide on their respective local priorities to build resilience against climate 
change. The entire exercise of deduction of risk provides an exhaustiv e baseline analysis of 
Bengaluru’s current socio -economic, demographic, infrastructure and service access, and 
sectoral situation, in a visually comprehensible and a succinct comparable format.  
The final output of risk assessment is presented by classifying wards under different 'Orders 
of Priority' in three broad categories:  
1. Order of priority indicating exposure to hazards based on extent of impacted 
area and population (presented in the previous section of hazard exposure , refer Figure-
36)- This is where the city should intervene immediately to develop utmost disaster 
preparedness and response mechanisms, and plan carefully to put required infrastructure/ 
measures in place to minimize the occurrence of hazards in the coming years.  
2. Order of priority indicating sensitivity to hazards based on underlying 
demographic and socio -economic conditions  (Figure-37)- This order broadly identifies 
the wards or localities which could be deeply impacted in case of a hazard, owing to certain 
deep -rooted characteristics which cannot be changed in the short -term . The city needs to be 
cognizant of these localities to be at higher risk than others while planning for resilience 
building and adaptation projects. Measures that enhance access to informat ion and education 
of citizens of prospective climate hazards and disaster management services would be useful 
proactive actions for these localities .   
3. Order of priority indicating (lack of) adaptive capacity based on access to 
services and amenities  (Figure -38)- This  order  broadly identifies the locations which are 
performing below certain prescribed benchmark and/ or are performing lower than the 
average city -wide performance against a set of accessibility parameters . These locations  can 
be considered to have  lower adaptive capacity than others in case of a hazard  and hence at 
higher risk . 
Chapter 8 of the CCRA -VA report provides details of the methodology used for deducing risk 
informed by order of priority and results.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   119  
 
 
 
 
 
Source: WRI India analysis using Census 2011, Built footprint from WSF 2019 and amenities from BBMP 
2022; details in CCRA -VA report  
Figure 37 Summarising order of priority based on sensitivity parameters  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   120  
  
Figure 38 Summarising order of priority based on (lack of) adaptive capacity  
Source: WRI India analysis using Census 2011, Built footprint from WSF 2019 and amenities from BBMP 
2022; details in CCRA -VA report  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   121  
One must acknowledge that for a city such as  Bengaluru, considering its geographic location, 
moderate climate and heterogenous  population from different socio -economic backgrounds, 
ethnicities, languages, and cultural groups, it is difficult to attribute vulnerability to a single 
specific group. Factors such as  migration, economic fluctuations, and urban development 
contribute to the dynamic nature of vulnerability. Moreover, limited data availability  and 
hidden vulnerabilities, and the interplay of multipl e factors , add complexity to attributing 
vulnerability.  
The findings from the vulnerabilit y and risk assessment discussed in the previous sections 
highlight the susceptibility of specific locations in Bengaluru which experience greater 
intensity of climate hazard s. Most of these locations  are in the peripheral parts of the city, i.e., 
areas which were added  to the corporation limits when the present jurisdiction of BBMP was 
created . Notably, they are also the areas  with less access to basic and critical services , and 
home to the  urban poor , especially unskilled migrant workers  who work  in informal sectors or 
construction activities , and who often lack access to government -provided social benefits  
(Goldman 2010) . Unskilled migrants from rural areas  (Viswanathan and Kumar 2015)  reside 
in unsafe conditions in peripheral areas , along railway lines, tank beds, quarry pits, 
stormwater drains, and solid waste dumpsites . They have access only to  inadequate housing 
such as  slums and informal settlements, and face heightened vulnerabilities as they lack  
essential amenities such as clean water, sanitation, and proper infrastructure (Chu and 
Micheal 2019) . For instance, a s shown in Figure 38, households in temporary dwellings in 
peripheral areas offer inadequate protection against inundation or leakage, leaving the urban 
poor highly vulnerable. Additionally, the lack of a proper  sewer system in these areas , 
combined with flood risks, as shown  in Figures 18 and 34, creates unhygienic conditions such 
as stagnant water from contaminated sewer s and flood ing. This further increas es the 
vulnerability of the residents  in these locations.  The findings indicate that the peripheral areas, 
character ised by high migrant populations, urban poor communities, and socio -economically 
disadvantaged individuals, are particularly vulnerable , owing to  their inherent v ulnerabilities . 
The situation  is exacerbated  by the lack of access to basic services, placing residents  at higher 
risk.  
Apart from economic and migration status , certain inherent demographic and socio -economic 
characteristics such as age, gender, ability , ethnic ity, and other marginal ised communities 
(such as Schedule d Castes and Tribes , LGBTQ + individuals)  contribute significantly to 
vulnerability  and adaptive capacity.  When t hese attributes  overlap in a n individual  or community , 
the result of such intersectionality can magnify the degree of vulnerability face d by an 
individual or community . Limited civic engagement and inadequate representation in 
decision -making processes further exacerbate vulnerability.  
Lastly, Bengaluru is also a hub for the gig economy, a global economic trend. The gig economy 
provides income -generating opportunities outside  of traditional employment relationships. 
However, it is still a largely unregulated sector in terms of labour rights , making workers 
vulnerable to extreme situations . There is a lack of reliable data on the informal workforce, as 
well as  gig workers, in Indian cities. Access to such data would enable inclusive planning and 
program mes, promoting resilience and adaptab ility in the face of disasters.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   122  
3.2  GHG inventory: Sources and sinks   
3.2.1 Scope and approach for GHG emission s inventory  
The Paris Agreement’s (UN 2015)  central aim is to strengthen the global response to the threat 
of climate change by keeping the global temperature rise  during  this century to less than  2°C  
above  pre-industrial levels , and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase even further 
to 1.5 °C. Additionally, the agreement aims to increase the ability of countries to deal with the 
impacts of climate change by lowering  GHG emissions and  developing  climate -resilient 
pathways. Human activities are estimated to have caused approximately 1.0°C of global 
warming above pre -industrial levels, with a likely range of 0.8°C to 1.2°C. Global warming is 
likely to reach 1.5°C between 2030 and 2050 if it continues to increase at the current  rate. A 
citywide GHG emission s inventory is a crucial component of a climate action plan that can 
provide a strategy to manage GHG risks and identify emission reduction 
opportunities/scenarios.  It enables  evidence -based mitigation action and target s, that can 
facilitate the  monitoring of progress towards climate goals.  
A city needs a GHG emission s inventory for the following reasons : 
• Climate change mitigation: Helps cities develop strategies to reduce emissions and 
combat climate change.  
• Policy development: Provides data for informed decision -making and setting emission 
reduction targets.  
• Baseline measurement: Establishes a starting point for tracking progress and 
evaluating efforts.  
• Planning and resource allocation: Identifies efficient and effective emission reduction 
opportunities.  
• Stakeholder engagement: Facilitates collaboration and awareness among businesses, 
organ isations, and residents.  
• Reporting and accountability: Meets reporting requirements, demonstrates 
commitment, and tracks performance.  
• Funding opportunities: Enhances eligibility for funding support for sustainability 
initiatives.  
Bengaluru ’s GHG emission s inventory covers three major GHGs – carbon dioxide (CO 2), 
methane (CH 4), and nitrous oxide (N 2O). The global warming potential ( GWP ), as discussed  
by IPCC in its fifth assessment report ('Fifth Assessment Report — IPCC ' 2014)  in 2014, has 
been referred to , in order to  arrive at warming potential estimates. Detail s on GHG  Accounting 
and Reporting Standard s for Cities  are in Annexure -B.1. 
GHG inventory reporting protocol  
To develop evidence -based strategies informed by  climatic impacts due to the excessive release 
of GHG s into the atmosphere , it is essential to have a GHG  emission s inventory. This  inventory 
is an estimate of emissions from the sources and sinks within a defined spatial and temporal 
dimension. World Resources Institute (WRI), C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group  (Cities 
C40) , and ICLEI – Local Governments for Sustainability (ICLEI) have partnered to create a 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   123  
standard protocol for cities , which is  formally known as  the Global Protocol for Community -
scale Greenhouse Gas Emission Inventories (GPC)  (GHG -GPC 2014) . The GPC provides a 
standard ised method and procedures to assist local governments in quantifying and reporting 
GHG emissions associated with the activities of the community they govern.  These standards 
are accepted and used in  cities all over the world. Regular ly updated  GHG emission s 
inventor ies enable cities to understand their climate impact, implement effective policies, 
measure progress, engage stakeholders, and secure resources for climate action.  Therefore, 
the C40 network recommends the same standards  to develop GHG emission inventor ies for 
member cities. Hence, Bengaluru ’s GHG emission s inventory is quantified using standard ised 
methods such as GPC and by the methodologies from the IPCC guidelines (IPCC 2006) . 
In line with the GPC emissions reporting standard, it is a requirement for membership of the 
C40 cities network to have a 1.5 °C-aligned climate action plan and a GHG emission inventory 
that meets at least the GPC BASIC level from 2019 (in the last three years leading up to the 
present. ) (Cities C40) . The Bengaluru GHG emission s inventory covers the sectors and sub -
sectors  required for the GPC BASIC level .  
BASIC -level sectors covered in the Bengaluru GHG emission s inventory .  
 
GHG inventory reporting tool  
The City Inventory Reporting and Information System  (CIRIS) is a GHG reporting tool that 
was developed by the C40 cities network and has been used to report emissions. CIRIS 
contains instructions for users within the tool , and i nstructions on set -up can be found in the 
CIRIS user guide  (Cities 2018a) . The tool primarily involves basic data entry of measured, 
derived, or estimated activity data in the inventory tabs and uses this to calculate the 
associated emissions.  
Bengaluru GHG emission s inventory information  
Inventory boundary:  Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP)  
Area:  About 713  sq. km. (Source: As per primary data shared by  BBMP  
Population:  10.17  million ( 2019 estimates ) 
Reporting period: January 2019 to December 2019 (2019 is taken as the base year to avoid COVID -
19 related externalities to calculate emissions ) STATIONARY ENERGY
Scope 1&2
Residential
Commercial and  
Institutional 
Industrial 
Non -specified sources TRANSPORTATION
Scope 1&2
On-road transportation
RailwaysWASTE (SOLID & LIQUID)
Scope 1&3
Municipal solid waste 
disposal to landfill
Biological treatment of 
MSW
Incineration and open 
burning
Wastewater treatment and 
open discharge
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   124  
 
Bengaluru GHG emission s inventory data collection process  
For the three sectors – stationary energy, transportation , and waste –emission estimates are 
based primarily on aggregated data collected from respective government 
agencies/departments. The data collected was in various forms and has been util ised to ensure 
its usage is within the inventory  boundaries.  Predominant data sources from each sector are  
mentioned in Table 13 below . 
Table 13: Sources of data collected  
Sector  Agencies/Departments 
from whom primary data 
was collected  Other key sources  of data collection 
(secondary sources, literature review , 
etc.)  
Stationary 
energy  BESCOM, GAIL, PPAC  GPC, IPCC guidelines and other secondary 
literature  
Transportation  DULT, Transport dept. , 
BMRCL, BMTC  CMP, Parivahan  portal , Google EIE,  IPCC 
guidelines  and secondary literature  
Waste  BBMP, BWSSB, KSPCB  GPC, IPCC guidelines and other secondary 
literature  
 
Limitations in the data collection process  and issues in the data received were broadly 
addressed as mentioned below : 
• In case of a lack of accurate data at the city level, state/national data  sets were referred  
to. In such cases, the data was adapted to align with the inventory boundary by 
adjusting changes in the activity using a scaling factor.  
• In case of  a lack of a recent dataset, the most recent ly updated dataset was used to 
estimate the inventory.  
• Based on dataset records available at the departments, as few departments maintain 
records in financial year format and few in calendar year  format , the data is analysed  
accordingly.  
• As the most recent  Census is 2011, the population of the city in 2019 is estimated by 
WRI India. Various projections prepared by different organ isations were analysed  and 
compared and the population was estimated accordingly.  Annexure  F provides a brief 
on population projections . 
3.2.2  Critical sources  
The GHG  Inventory for Bengaluru includes an analysis of all the major sectors/sources that 
emit GHGs  into the atmosphere and the major sectors/land uses that absorb  (or sequester) 
GHGs from the atmosphere.  The city -wide GHG inventory allows cities to build evidence -
based mitigation strategies and policies to form a climate action plan (CAP) and  can be a 
powerful tool for monitoring progress towards emission targets. Hence, the GHG inventory 
forms a critical piece of any CAP , by establi shing the sources and sinks of GH Gs. 
Bengaluru’s  total GHG emissions in 2019 were  estimated at 18.73 million metric tonnes 
(MMT) of CO 2e. This corresponds to  1.84 tonnes of C O2e per person for the year 2019.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   125  
Analysis of Bengaluru’s sector -wise  breakup of GHG emissions indicates that the stationary 
energy sector is responsible for 12.83 MMT , which is 68% of the total emissions. This is 
followed by 3.87 MMT  from the transportation sector and 2.02 MMT  from the waste sector. 
Figure 39 illustrates the sector -wise share of GHG emissions for the city.  
Figure 39 Sector -wise share of total GHG emissions in Bengaluru  
Source: WRI India analysis for BBMP jurisdiction based on GHG -GPC framework  (BASIC Level)  
 
 
Figure 40 indicates the sub -sectors responsible for the emissions. A major share of the city’s 
emissions is from energy use in residential buildings, followed by commercial buildings and 
on-road transportation. Electricity consumption contributes significantly to the total 
emissions (59%) due to a considerable share of  the coal-based grid in the city.  
 
Figure 40 Emissions from sub -sectors   
 
Source: WRI India analysis for BBMP jurisdiction based on GHG -GPC framework (BASIC Level)  
(*Description of non-specified sources is mentioned in the following  section  and glossary ) 
 
 68%21%11%
Stationary Energy
Transportation
Waste
27%
26%
6%10%20%0%
5%1% 0%
5%Residential Buildings
Commercial and institutional buildings
Manufacturing industries and construction
Non-specified sources (*)
On-road transportation
Railways
Solid waste disposal to the landfill
Biological treatment of solid waste
Incineration and open burning
Wastewater treatment and discharge
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   126  
 
Stationary energy  
The stationary energy sector consists  of electricity and fuel consumption from (i) residential 
buildings, (ii) commercial and institutional buildings , (iii) manufacturing industries and 
construction , and (iv) non-specified  sources  (NSS) . This sector accounts for 68% of the city’s 
total GHG emissions. Within this, emissions from electricity consumption account for  86% of 
total GHG emissions from stationary energy. The major end -use of electricity is for cooling 
through various  technolog ies, followed by office equipment, lighting, fan s, and water heaters.  
The remaining energy demand is met by  the consumption of PNG, LPG, diesel , petrol , 
charcoal, fuelwood, and kerosene. LPG, PNG, charcoal,  and fuelwood fuels are  primarily  used 
for cooking and heating water, whereas diesel and petrol are used for backup electricity 
generators. The p ublic distribution system has stopped the distribution and supply of 
kerosene, but it is still used  by people living  below  the poverty line and in other low-income 
groups , mostly for lighting and heating.  Residential  buildings account  for 4.97 MMT  of CO 2e 
(39% of total stationary energy emissions), commercial and institutional buildings accounts 
for 4.91 MMT  of CO 2e (38% of total stationary energy emissions) , and the remaining emissions 
come  from manufacturing industries ,  construction , and non -specified source s as illustrated 
in the  Figure 41. Emissions from non -specified source s for Bengaluru GHG inventory are only 
from the consumption of grid electricity through the open access market. Electricity 
consumers with a load requirement above 1 MW can choose their electricity supplier from  the 
open access market , as per the Electricity Act , 2003 .52 
The d etailed methodology for calculating  emissions from  this sector is discussed  in Annex ure 
B2. 
 
 
Figure 41 Contributors to the  stationary energy sector's GHG emissions  in Bengaluru (2019)  
 
Source: WRI India analysis for BBMP jurisdiction based on GHG -GPC framework  
 
52 Open Access, 2019,  (CEEW 2019)   
Residential 
Buildings
39%
Commercial and 
institutional 
buildings
38%Manufacturing 
industries and 
construction
9%Non-specified 
sources
14%
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   127  
 
Transportation  
For the purposes of the  GHG inventory, Bengaluru’s transport sector consists  of (i) On-road 
transport and (ii) Railways . The aviation sector has not been considered in this inventory , as 
Bengaluru ’s international airport is located outside the BBMP boundary  and transboundary 
travel is not included within the GPC -BASIC  reporting level.  Furthermore, Bengaluru does  not 
have a suburban rail system at present , and the share of the city’s population that uses  railways 
as an intra -city mode of commute is very small . Considering th is, the ‘ railways’ category  for 
this inventory  includes on ly metro rail. Annexure  B2 detail s the  methodology followed to 
arriv e at GHG emissions from the transport sector.   
 
Figure 42 Contributors to the t ransport sector's GHG  emissions  in Bengaluru (2019)  
 
Source: WRI India analysis for BBMP jurisdiction based on GHG -GPC framework  
 
As shown  in Figure 42, on-road transport accounts  for 98% of the transport sector emissions  
of 3.8 MMT  of CO 2e. This is due to the high share of fossil fuel consumption across passenger 
and freight modes. A n analysis of mode -wise contributors shows  that diesel -powered  freight 
vehicles, petrol -powered  motorcycles, and diesel buses together account for 89.6% of the total 
GHG emissions in the transport sector , as seen in Figure 43. The r ailways are responsible for 
2% of total  transport emissions. Although the metro  operate s on electricity, the emissions  it 
causes  can be attributed to the electricity grid’s dependence o n coal.  
 
 
 
 
 98%2%
On-road
transportation
Railways
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   128  
 
Figure 43 Mode -wise contributors to transport sector emissions  (in million metric tonnes of CO 2e 
and % ) 
 
Source: WRI India analysis for BBMP jurisdiction based on GHG -GPC framework  
 
Waste  
Cities produce solid waste and wastewater together referred to collectively as ‘waste ’. The 
waste sector comprises municipal solid waste (hereafter referred to as solid waste) and 
domestic wastewater (hereafter referred to as domestic wastewater)  that may be disposed of 
and/or treated at facilities inside the city boundary  or transported to other sites  for treatment. 
Waste disposal and treatment produce GHG emissions through aerobic or anaerobic 
decomposition , or incineration  (GHG -GPC  2014) .  
Figure 44 shows  the contribution of waste sector emissions.  
Figure 44: Contributors of the w aste sector's GHG emissions for Bengaluru  (2019)  
 
Source: WRI India analysis for BBMP jurisdiction based on GHG -GPC framework  
 
Petrol -Motorcycle , 
1.21, (31%)
Petrol -Car, 0.19, 
(5%)
Diesel -Car, 0.08, 
(2%)
Diesel -Bus, 0.65, 
(17%)Diesel -Freight , 1.61, 
(42%)Electricity -Metro , 
0.07, (2%)Others , 0.06, (1%)
Solid waste 
disposed in to 
the landfill
48%
Biological 
treatment of solid 
waste…Incineration and 
open burning
0%Domestic 
wastewater 
treatment and 
discharge
45%
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   129  
Within the BBMP boundary, the waste sector contributes to about 2.02 MMT of CO 2e, which 
accounts for  11% of total GHG emissions of the city.   
a. Solid waste : Solid waste contributes about 1.04 MMT  of CO 2e, which is about 55% of 
total waste sector emissions . It includes solid waste disposed of in landfill s, biological 
treatment of solid waste , and incineration of biological and hazardous waste. 
According to BBMP  data, approximately 43.76 % of mixed (unsegregated ) waste is 
disposed of in the landfill . Of this,  24.55 % of the waste is biodegradable , making it  the 
major contributor of methane emissions from the landfill , as the landfill currently does 
not have a  gas capture facility.  
According to recent data , there is no open burning53 of waste within  the BBMP 
boundary, hence this is not considered  as part of the city’s GHG emission inventory.  
b. Domestic wastewater:  The domestic wastewater treatment/discharge contributes 
to about 0.98 MMT  of CO 2e, accounting for  about 45%  of total waste sector emissions. 
The majority of N2O and CH4 emissions come from 36% of waste water because it  is 
untreated, while the remaining 64% of water accounts for a smaller amount of CH4 
and N2O emissions . This is mainly  due to energy inputs, organic matter degradation 
and biological nutrient removal (BNR). (Fine and Hadas 2012)   
The d etailed methodology for calculating  GHG emission s and the  rationale for data 
component inclusion s and exclusions is discussed  in Annexure  B. 
3.2.3  Understan ding the linkage between  GHG emissions and air quality in 
Bengaluru  
Air pollution and climate change are two sides of the same coin,  for they share the same 
sources of emission . Hence , they  need to be addressed  together  (Bank 2022) , with a focus on 
protecting people’s health, particularly for low-income and vulnerable groups.  The transport 
sector is the largest contributor to air pollution  (CSTEP 2022)  and the second -largest 
contributor of GHG s in Bengaluru . Short -lived pollutants  (for instance, black carbon from 
burning fossil fuels in transport vehicles and power plants , as well as from burning fuels such 
as wood and kerosene in households ) absorb  significant  amount s of heat from  sunlight , 
contributing  to climate change. They are also associated with public health risks such as 
respiratory and cardiovascular diseases.  By integrating air pollution management and climate 
action planning, Bengaluru can enhance its climate change mitigation  potential , as well as  co-
benefits for air qu ality and public health , with minim al trade -offs. 
 
 
53 As per GPC, open burning is an uncontrolled, often illicit process with different emissions. Difficulties in 
accurately estimating the amount of waste being burned, the composition of waste, the effects of external factors, 
lack of monitoring and reporting capabilities, and the informal nature of the practice make it challenging to 
completely eradicate open burning.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   130  
Findings  from C40 Cities analysis of emissions sources and air pollution 
(Pathway -AQ):  
As per  the C40 Cities analysis  of emissions sources and air pollution (Pathway -AQ), the 
baseline population -weighted annual average PM2.5 concentration for Bengaluru in 2019 was 
estimated at 37.9 µg/m3. This concentration was apportioned to sources using the city’s GHG 
inventory, accounting for in -city emissions, and emissions associated with the production of 
electricity used in Bengaluru. It also included a non -modelled portion, w ith represent ing 
sources  not included in the GHG inventory  such as industrial processes  (non -fuel 
combustion) , sources located outside the city that influence its air quality, and regional natural 
sources such as dust. This analysis showed that  the major contributors to PM2.5 air pollution 
are on -road transportation and industrial sources, shown in  the figure below.  
Figure 45: Baseline PM2.5 concentration by sector  
 
Source: C40 Cities Analysis  2023  
3.2.4  Carbon sinks  
Forest s and trees store carbon in pools or reservoirs, such as biomass and soil. The transfer of 
carbon from terrestrial pools  to the atmosphere results in CO 2 emissions , while the reverse  – 
the transfer of carbon fro m the atmosphere to terrestrial pools  – results in CO 2 removal  or 
sequestration  (GHG -GPC 2014) . Hence, forests  and trees  can be deemed both net carbon 
emitters and sinks based on their functionality and characteristics .54 
IPCC 6AR state s that all mitigation pathways compatible with limiting global warming to 1.5 °C 
must  also involve significant removal of CO 2 from the atmosphere, highlighting the 
importance of both maintaining and expanding the ability of forests and trees outside forests 
to capture and store carbon.  Currently, urban areas act as net sources of GHGs , and trends of 
urban isation are leading to increased GHG emissions and exacerbating climate change 
 
54 Trees fix carbon during photosynthesis and store it in form of biomass. Through the tree’s lifecycle, whether  it 
dies as it is consumed or decomposes as it ages,  the carbon stored is  released back into the atmosphere . This cycle 
repeats itself as a new tree grows and s equester s carbon . Therefore, the  dynamics of forests' net long -term CO 2 
source  and/or sink utility keeps alter ing over time . <1% <1%<1% 1%
2%
10%
87%Individual generators
Residential
Commercial
Grid Electricity
Manufacturing Industrial
sector
On-road
Non-modelled
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   131  
impacts.  In this context, having integrated urban environments (blue -green networks) 
interspersed with built up becomes important to climate -proof cities. Urban blue -green 
networks and forests can support both adaptation and r esilience (by managing the impacts of 
climate change) and mitigation (by sequestering carbon, hence reducing the GHG emissions 
that cause climate change) .  
Despite their unparalleled benefits, urban green spaces are often overlooked due to the 
complex and enigmatic nature of the ecosystem services they provide. The role and health of 
urban green spaces are also seriously undermined (creating an imbalance or change in the 
plant physiology, biochemistry , etc.) , especially due to changing climatic conditions . To 
accelerate climate neutrality at a differential biogeographical scale focusing on cities, the 
preparation of annual inventories of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and carbon stocks at 
the city level can help facilitate and safeguard actions enhancing c arbon storage and 
sequestration capacities.  
As highlighted  in previous sections  of this report , the GHG emission s inventory prepared for 
Bengaluru  is at the  GPC -BASIC reporting level . This level excludes emissions from  the 
following sectors :55 1) Agriculture , Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU)56 and 2) Industrial 
Process and Product Use (IPPU).  However, cogn isant of the  import ant role played  by forests 
and trees  in CO 2 sequestration, an assessment has been done for trees in the city  under this 
section. This has been carried out following the framework prescribed by  the Global Protocol 
for Community -Scale Greenhouse Gas Inventories : Supplemental Guidance for Forests and 
Tree s. 
The following section seeks  to estimate the carbon dioxide dynamics of urban trees using the 
I Tree Canopy tool developed by  the US Forest Service . Refer  to Annexure B3 for details on 
the methodology. The tool uses Google satellite imagery of the Earth’s surface to provide 
estimates of tree canopy denseness. The removal and emission factor s of urban trees are 
derived using  the IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories  (IPCC Guidelines 
2006 2019)  and the Forest Survey of India’s carbon stock reports  (FSI Chapter -5). 
The analysis is divided into two parts – change in CO 2 stock over an inventory period and 
recent stock in terms of Carbon emitted and sequestered.  With the help of historic and recent 
imagery, gross changes in the tree canopy and subsequent carbon stock are computed as 
follows : 
• Gross tree canopy denseness lost over the period and resultant carbon emitted ; and  
 
55 AFOLU and IPPU are considered in the BASIC+ reporting level 
56  It is the ‘Land ’ sub-sector  under the AFOLU sector , which should have accounted for emissions/removal of 
CO 2 by forest s and trees under the BASIC+ reporting level.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   132  
• Area of tree canopy cover maintained and/or gained in the horizon year from for the 
base year of an inventory period57 and the resultant carbon sequestrated . 
For the eight BBMP  zones, a tree canopy cover analysis was done  using  the I-Tree Canopy tool 
with a standard error of 2% following the methodology prescribed by  Global Protocol for 
Community -Scale Greenhouse Gas Inventories, GPC supplemental Guidance for Forests and 
Trees, WRI 2022  (Gibbs, Harris, and Pool 2022) . This analysis was done for a n inventory  
period of 21 year s, from  2001 to 2022.  It indicates  that the  city is seeing an annual tree 
canopy density loss  of about 720 ha/year , while it has ‘standing tree canopy cover 
and newly planted tree canopy cover’  of annual tree canopy density of 924 ha/year . 
The carbon sequestration poten tial of standing tree canopy cover and newly planted tree 
canopy cover corresponds to 199,285 tonnes of CO 2/year  (i.e., around 0.20 MMT of 
CO 2/year ). The analysis reveals that 15,317 hectares of tree cover canopy was lost  in 
the BBMP area over the  inventory period (2 oo1-2022 ), which contributed to emissions from 
this segment. Refer to Figure 46 for illustration of zone-wise tree canopy cover in Bengaluru 
in 2001 and 2022 , and the dynamics of the estimated annual carbon emitted and stored 
between 2001 and 2022.  
  
 
57 Over an inventory period , many  growing plants may mature into trees , or may undergo natural processes 
altering their canopy density and size. Therefore, to avoid statistical  conflicts , the tree canopy cover for the 
horizon year is defined as tree canopy density  gained  or maintaine d. 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   133  
Figure 46 Estimates of carbon emitted and store d annually by Trees outside Forests  in Bengaluru  
between 2001 and 2022 , and zone-wise tree canopy cover density  (2001 and 2022)  
 
Source: WRI India Analysis 2022, using I -Tree Canopy  (see Annexure B 3 for detailed methodology)  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   134  
 
 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   135  
4 FUTURE EMISSION MITIGATION PATHWAYS FOR BENGALURU  
 
Bengaluru has embarked on a mission to align its future with the global goal of limiting global 
warming to 1.5 ℃ as enshrined in the Paris Agreement.  With this plan, the city is striving to 
adopt a strategic roadmap and implement actions to reduce emissions.  In order to develop a 
credible pathway to achieving a reduction in emissions by  2030, 2040 and  2050, several 
scenarios were developed to identify strategies that would help Bengaluru meet this ambitious 
goal. Informed by the baseline emission in ventory prepared for the city for 2019 (presented in 
Chapter  3), emission reduction pathways were developed for the major emitting sectors: 
energy , transport and waste under various strategic conditions. The strategies identified for 
each sector broadly encompass technological and systemic changes that influence GHG 
emissions (for example, decarbon ising the grid, or switching to green and low-carbon 
transport systems).  
With this plan, Bengaluru ’s endeavour  will be  to implement actions for achieving a set of long -
term emission reduction targets of 16% by 2030, 26% by 2040, and 56% by 2050 compared 
to 2019 baseline emissions (refer  to Figure 47). Achieving these ambitious targets will require 
the implementation of equally ambitious actions under each strategic umbrella in all three 
sectors, i.e., energy, transport,  and waste , which are presented in Chapter  5. Specific targets 
for important strategies in each sector are presented later in this chapter.  
 
Figure 47 Long -term GHG emission mitigation potential achieved under different scenarios for 
Bengaluru  
 
Source: WRI India Analysis using Pathways tool developed by C40 Cities  
 0102030405060
2019 2030 2040 2050Million t CO2e/yearLong -term GHG emission mitigation potential for Bengaluru under different 
scenarios
Buiness As Usual Scenario Existing & Planned Scenario
Ambitious Scenario Extended Scenario
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   136  
While these are ambitious targets, the city acknowledges that these are not sufficient to meet 
its ambition of achieving net -neutrality by 2050 due to several systemic barriers that exist 
along the pathway. Therefore, a set of more ambitious or extended ta rgets were developed 
(34% by 2030, 58% by 2040, and 91% reduction by 2050 , compared to 2019 baseline 
emissions ) which are considered achievable only under conditional circumstances, i.e., if all 
those barriers are overcome.  This is challenging , as it will require the entire technological, 
economic, political,  and social ecosystem within and beyond the city, i.e., at the sub-national, 
national and global level s, to be positively aligned to the 1.5 ℃ warming scenario.  Nevertheless, 
the city is determined to monitor and report on residual emissions along with a periodic 
updation of the GHG inventory every two years thro ugh a robust monitoring, evaluation and 
reporting mechanism as mentioned in Chapter -7 of this report.  
4.1 Future Emission Mitigation Pathways : Methodology  
The city has undertaken a scientifically robust yet pragmatic approach to identify strategies 
which can deliver on the city’s ambition to create a cleaner , and more prosperous city. To 
model a trajectory which could keep within these limits established in the Paris Agreement, 
four scenarios (Refer  to Figure 47) were developed using the Pathways model, an Excel-based 
scenario planning tool that is flexible and can be tailored to reflect a particular city’s context 
and conditions  (Cities 2018a) . They were developed over a period of seven months, primarily 
from with insights gained from desk -based research and consultations conducted for this 
action plan. All the scenarios were developed in consultation with key departments and 
stakeholder agencies  who play a vital role in the city’s emission reduction pathways. Inputs on 
both existing and planned policies, plans, schemes, initiatives, organ isational targets, and 
many more were collected and duly considered for the scenario development exercise. E ach 
scenario provides an evidence -based  roadmap to achieve Bengaluru's emission mitigation 
goals with certain sets of strategic interventions with varied degree s of intensity.   
Some of the  basic parameters considered for developing these scenarios included the city’s 
projected population and GDP for the target years. The city’s population is projected to be 
around 19.8 million by 2050, which is almost double  the base year population (refer to Section 
2.1 and Figure 6 for details). Economic activities corresponding to an increase in population 
growth would result in an increase in  the GDP, which is expected to be almost four times (by 
2050) of the base year value58(see Figure 48). 
 
 
58 GDP projections for BBMP were  arrived at based on GDDP of Bengaluru Urban District data taken from  the 
Economic Survey of Karnataka's annual reports from 2013 to 2020.   
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   137  
Figure 48 Population and GDP projections from Base Year  
 
Source: Based on Census 2011, population projections by JICA , and Economic  Survey of Karnataka  
4.2  Future emission scenarios  
Three types of GHG emission scenarios that are relevant to the development of BCAP are 
illustrated in  Figure 49. 
Figure 49 Future emission scenarios  
 
Source: C40 Cities emission pathway’s framework  
 0500,0001,000,0001,500,0002,000,0002,500,000
0510152025
2019 2030 2040 2050
GDP (Rs. in crores)Population (in millions)Population and GDP Projections
 Population (in millions) GDP (in crores)

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   138  
4.2.1  Business -as-usual scenario  
The development of a business -as-usual baseline emission forecast for a horizon year 
describes a ‘no -action scenario’ , where no additional mitigation efforts are implemented by 
the city or other entities. The baseline forecast serves as a reference from which the impact of 
emission reduction scenarios is measured.  
Figure 50 Business -as-usual scenario emission estimate  
 
Source: WRI India Analysis using Pathways tool developed by C40 Cities  
 
As the above graph indicates, with no actions, the emissions are expected to reach 49.77 
million tonnes CO 2e/year by 2050, increasing approximately 165% between 2019 -2050 , 
primarily owing to population growth increase in economic activities and improved quality of 
life. 
4.2.2  Existing and planned scenario  
Existing and planned scenario is an emission reduction scenario that considers existing or 
planned city, regional and national actions ( e.g., policies, projects, etc.)  that are expected to 
reduce Bengaluru’s GHG emissions in future years. ‘Planned’ actions/initiatives considered in 
this scenario are activities that are certain to occur. Actions/policies that could be in proposal 
or in place, but carry some uncertainty, are not considered appropriate for this scenario, 
because it is supposed to give as close to the ‘current ’ trajectory as possible.  
The scenario may also include non -policy driven market trends when there is adequate 
evidence that such a trend is likely to occur. Information was gathered from existing policies, 
plans, initiatives, schemes , etc., such as India’s National Action Plan for Climate Change 
(NAPCC), Karnataka’s State Action Plan for Climate Change , and relevant sector -specific 
policies and plans (such as Karnataka Renewable Energy Policy 2022 -27, KREDL’s Karnataka 
Energy Conservation and Energy Efficiency Policy 2022 -27, Compr ehensive Mobility Plan for 
Bengaluru 2020, and BBMP -SWM Bye-laws , 2020).   
 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   139  
Figure 51 Emission reduction potential of actions in the E&P scenario  
 
Source: WRI India Analysis using Pathways tool developed by C40 Cities   
 
As per this scenario, emissions are expected to reach approximately 29 million ton nes 
CO 2e/year by 2050, an increase of 58% in comparison to the base year , 2019. Under this 
scenario, Bengaluru city can achieve a 59% of grid electricity generation59 from non -fossil fuel 
by 2050. This scenario also estimates that 26% of buses will switch from fossil fuels to cleaner 
fuels such as electricity and hydrogen by 2050. The emission trends are not aligned with 1.5°C 
Paris Agreement and Deadline 2020 emission trajectories.  
4.2.3  Ambitious scenario  
The Existing and Planned scenario policies leave a significant gap in the 1.5°C Paris Agreement 
and Deadline 2020 trajectory, indicating that significantly more aggressive action would be 
required for Bengaluru city to meet a fair share 1.5°C warming scenario. Therefore, an 
‘Ambitious’ scenario was modelled, and the objective of this scenar io is to arrive at strategies 
and actions that are both ambitious and achievable. It includes the strategies that are included 
in the existing and planned scenario , as well as  additional strategies to build on this 
foundation , to increase the reduction pot ential of GHG emissions.  
 
59 Electricity generated from hydro and nuclear power plants are considered non -fossil fuel. India has set a target 
to have 50 % cumulative electric power installed capacity from non -fossil fuel -based energy resources by 2030. 
The installed capacity is not the same as electricity generation.  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   140  
 
Figure 52 Emission reduction potential of actions in the ambitious scenario  
 
Source: WRI India Analysis using Pathways tool developed by C40 Cities   
 
This scenario also considers India’s updated NDCs. India now stands committed to reduce 
emissions intensity of its GDP by 45 % by 2030, compared to  2005 levels , and to achieve about 
50% cumulative electric power installed capacity from non -fossil fuel -based energy resources 
by 2030. These commitments propagate a healthy and sustainable way of living , based on 
traditions and the values of conservation and moderation, including through a mass 
movement for ‘ LiFE’ (Lifestyle for Environment ) as a key to combatin g climate change. The 
decision on enhanced NDCs demonstrates India’s commitment at the highest level for 
decoupling of economic growth from GHG  emissions  (“Cabinet Approves India’s Updated 
Nationally Determined Contribution to Be Communicated to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change” 2022) . 
In the ambitious scenario, emissions are forecast to reduce 16% by 2030 , and 56% by 2050 , 
compared to 2019 -level emissions. This means that the city ’s remaining emission s amount to 
a 44% gap in meeting the 2050 target of net  zero.  The main  source s (two -thirds) of residual 
emissions in 2050 are the transport , energy , and building sector s, as seen in  Figure 53. This is 
mostly attributed to  fossil fuel use in on -road vehicles and the electricity grid not being fully 
decarbon ised by 2050  (10% of electricity would still come  from coal thermal power plants ).  
 
 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   141  
Figure 53: Remaining emissions after ambitious scenario actions  
 
Source: WRI India and C40 Cities analysis 2022, using Pathways tool 
 
The t able below shows the summary of GHG emission  reduction  under  the Existing and 
Planned and Ambitious Scenarios . 
Table 14 Summary of GHG emission reduction under E&P and Ambitious Scenarios  
 
Source: WRI India and C40 Cities analysis 2022, using Pathways tool 
 
Sectoral strategies and targets to achieve the ambitious scenario  
In the Pathways scenario exercise, a strategy is defined as a parameter that includes 
information about the types of technologies involved and the scale or extent of the 
transformation that the strategy will cause in the community. Enabling actions are 05000001000000150000020000002500000
Residential Commercial
/ InstitutionalIndustrial On-Road Railways Solid Waste WastewaterTonnes of CO2e/Year

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   142  
interventions that governments  and other  stakeholders  carry out to implement a strategy or 
set of strategies. Emphasis is placed on the ambitious scenario and its emission reduction 
potential in the climate action planning process , and the sections below introduce the key 
strategies and their enabling actions for various  sectors.   
Consultations with sectoral experts in the city and affiliated agencies were carried out to 
determine strategies and actions that are fit for the city’s conditions and objectives. Apart from 
the consultations, a thorough secondary research was carried out , and additional enabling 
actions were  proposed.    
Figure 54: Types of enabling actions  
 
Source: WRI India analysis  
 
 
Energy and  Building  
Bengaluru’s GHG emission inventory ( Figure 39) reveals that stationary energy is the most 
emissions -intensive sector, followed by transport and waste. Electricity consumption accounts 
for 86% of total GHG emissions from stationary energy , while  the remain der is from fuel 
consumption. The sector strategies and actions will primarily focus on having a fully 
decarbon ised electricity grid, improving energy efficiency, and just transition to cleaner fuels. 
In the ambitious scenario, it is estimated that by 2050 , grid electricity generation from 
renewables will be around 88%. The estimated value has been arrived at by considering India’s 
updated NDCs , which have  set a target of about 50% cumulative electric power installed 
capacity from non -fossil fuel -based energy resources by 2030. Program mes and policies such 
as Energy Conservation Building Codes (ECBC), Eco -Niwas Samhita (ENS), and Karnataka 
Energy Conservation and Energy Efficiency Policy 2022 -2027 , were considered for building 
energy efficiency strategy inputs . With this, it is estimated that in the ambitious scenario, 
around 92% of all new residential buildings  will have better wall and roof system technology 
i.e., incorporating insulation in the walls and installing double -glazed windows. For new 
commercial buildings  and major renovations ( i.e., transition of existing to new roof/ wall 
technologies ), the implementation of the above -mentioned building energy efficiency strategy 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   143  
is estimated to be 100%.  Similarly, transition to clean cooking fuel of about 59% to LPG/PNG 
and 41% to electric cooking in residential buildings has been assumed. Ongoing initiatives 
such as the  Go Electric campaign for eCooking devices and the Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala 
Yojna60 (PMUY) were considered for arriving at clean cooking fuel transition values for 2050.      
Transport  
Bengaluru’s GHG emission inventory reveals that the transport sector is the second largest  
contributor of emissions in the city. Within the sector, the prominent contributors are freight 
vehicles, private vehicles (cars and motorcycles) , and buses. The sectoral goals of the city focus 
on three main aspects to reduce future emission s: (a) Mode shift, (b) Fuel switch and (c) 
Transit -oriented development (TOD)61. In the ambitious scenario , the city needs to increase 
its mode share s of public and non -motorised transport (NMT) to 85% by 2050. This also aligns 
with the Comprehensive Mobility Plan (CMP) for Bengaluru 2020, which aims to increase the 
share of public transport to 70% by 203562. The expansion of the metro rail network , the 
operationalisation of the suburban rail system , and upgrad es of the city bus system are positive 
steps to increase the mode share of public transport and decrease the dependency on private 
vehicles. The ambitious scenario targets that 90% of private vehicles, 75% of buses , and 47% 
of freight will switch from fossil fuels to cleaner fuels such as electricity and hydrogen by 2050. 
The ongoing push for electrification of vehicles by various levels of government and agencies 
through various schemes, programmes,  and initiatives , is expected to enable  progre ss in the 
desired direction . Additionally, the ongoing  active discussions  and research could lead to the  
introduc tion of  hydrogen as a commercial fuel in the near future. The TOD Policy of 
Bengaluru63 aims to increase population density around mass transit corridors (in TOD 
influence zones) , thus  boosting the mode share of public transport and catalysing the adoption 
of NMT modes. Specific actions required to achieve this ambitious scenario and its goals are 
detail ed in Chapter 5 of this report. These actions need be taken up by the city and other 
relevant stakeholder agencies to achieve the ambitious scenario.  
Waste  
In the GHG emission inventory prepared for the waste sector in Bengaluru, solid waste 
disposal to landfill , and domestic wastewater treatment and open discharge , contribute about 
93% of total waste sector emissions. The sector strategies and actions primarily focus on 
diverting solid waste from landfills  as much as possible,  by increasing composting, recycling,  
and biological wastewater treatment methods to reduce GHG emissions. In the ambitious 
scenario, by 2050, it is assumed that only 8% of solid waste enters s cientific landfills with 
biogas capture facility and only 5% of wastewater will be openly discharged and the rest will 
be treated in biological wastewater treatment plants. This is assumed by taking into 
consideration the provision of SWM Rules 2016 and BBMP SWM Bye-laws , 2020, as well as  
 
60 The scheme was launched in 2016 , in view of  the necessity for clean fuel. In the last six years, the initiative has 
been fruitful in increasing the use of LPG. The government has been actively promoting piped natural gas (PNG) , 
which is more economically viable than LNG  [we should spell it out here] .  
61 This urban planning measure has a direct impact on trip characteristics.  
62 2035 is the target year for CMP 2020 ,and the 70% share of public transport mentioned there is its share within 
all ‘motor ised modes’.  
63 This has been approved by the Karnataka government in November, 2022  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   144  
BBMP’s SWM roadmap and vision document which  focuses on the complete segregation of 
waste at source and less than 15% of solid waste entering landfills. The city is working to 
augment/ upgrad e its waste collection infrastructure and treatment facilities in order to reduce  
mixed waste disposal to landfills. Strategies also take into consideration BWSSB’s current 
efforts towards expanding the sewerage network across the city, and increasing the 
implementation of biological wastewater treatment methods that may  lead to increased 
wastewater collection and biological treatment by 2050. The city’s short -term focus includes 
increasing public awareness, implementing waste segregation program mes, improving 
recycling infrastructure, promoting composting initiatives, implementing waste reduction 
measures, strengthening waste management infrastructure, fostering collaboration, 
monitoring and evaluating initiatives, enforcing regulations, and conduc ting pilot projects for 
innovative waste management technologies.  
The key strategies in the ambitious scenario described above inform sector -wise  targets and 
actions for the stationary energy, transport, and waste sectors. An example of Pathways 
strategies and their targeted implementation for the interim and long -term years is listed in 
Table 15 below.  
Table 15: Ambitious scenario strategy goals and targets for Bengaluru  
Sector  Strateg ic goals  Targets  
2030  2040  2050  
Energy and  
Buildings  % Share of total grid electricity from non-fossil 
fuel 69 77 89 
% Transition of predominan tly existing LPG 
cooking technology to electric cooking 
technology in residential buildings  30 35 41 
% Transition of existing cooling system 
technology to high efficiency cooling system 
technology in commercial buildings  38 59 80 
% Transition of existing wall and roof system 
to insulated wall and roof system in new 
residential buildings  47 67 92 
% Transition of existing wall and roof system 
to insulated wall and roof system in new 
commercial buildings  48 75 100 
% Improvement in industrial energy efficiency 
– MSMEs  15 20 25 
Transportation  % Mode share of public transport and NMT64 75 80 85 
% Share of cleaner fuels65 in cars 10 60 90 
% Share of cleaner fuels in motorcycles  30 60 90 
% Share of cleaner fuels in buses  12 40 75 
% Share of cleaner fuels in freight  8 27 47 
~% of new households in the city (from 2019) 
that should be in the transit -oriented 
development areas  
 20 70 92 
 
64 Non -Motorised Transport ( includes , walking and cycling)  [this footnote can be removed]  
65 Includes electricity and hydrogen  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   145  
Sector  Strateg ic goals  Targets  
2030  2040  2050  
Waste  % Of paper waste recycled  61 72 93 
% Of plastic waste recycled  61 72 93 
% Of wet waste composted  68 80 84 
% Of landfill gas capture  25 50 75 
% Of direct discharge  28 23 5 
% Of anaerobic wastewater treatment with 
biogas capture  23 25 39 
Source: WRI India analysis  
4.2.4  Extended scenario for achieving net  zero emission target s in Bengaluru  
For BCAP an extended scenario was prepared , as the ambitious scenario was still presented a 
gap to achieve net  zero by 2050.  The extended scenario is intended to: (a) identify key 
strategies that could reduce the remaining emissions if key barriers to implementation did not 
exist , and (b) identify the political, financial, governance, technical and market barriers that 
make the strategy infeasible in current and foreseeable future conditions.   
Figure 55 Emission reduction potential of actions in the extended scenario  
 
 
Source: WRI India and C40 Cities analysis 2022, using Pathways tool 
 
As per this scenario, emissions are expected to reduce to 1.6 million tons CO 2e/year by 2050. 
This is a 91% decrease from base year emissions, and thus  the closest scenario to achieve the 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   146  
net zero target. Key  strategies considered here include 100% decarbonisation of the electricity 
grid by 2050 , 50% improvement in industrial energy efficiency , 90% transition to electric 
cooking , 100% vehicular shift to cleaner fuels , 100% energy recovery from scientific landfill s, 
and increasing anaerobic treatment with biogas capture by 2050.   
As mentioned earlier, this scenario is highlighted as ‘ unfeasible to achieve’ considering the 
current conditions. A summary of the barriers with respect to each of the key strategies is in 
the section below. Refer to Annexure  C for detailed barrier analysis.  
 
Barriers to  achieving 100% decarbonisation of the electricity grid by 2050  
In the global mission to curb GHG  emissions, increasing the share of renewable energy plays 
a prominent  role. India’s road to renewable energy is promising , as it has committed to 
ambitious targets such as  achieving  500GW installed capacity of non -fossil fuel power plants 
by 2030.  Yet, a just transition at the scale India requires is challenging due to several barriers , 
and Karnataka  is no exception . Among  legal and institutional barriers , land acquisition  is one 
of the biggest  challenge s, as government revenue lands are exhausted. BESCOM continu es to 
pay the fixed charges of long -term contracts , and is unable to void them . Alongside  the 
increase in the procurement of renewable energy, BESCOM also needs to honour  the long -
term contracts  with fossil  fuel power plants . This situation  has made the total power purchase 
by BESCOM  expensive , creating  a financial barrier. The city has no control over the state and 
national grid. Renewable energy targets are set by state and national government departments , 
and procurement notices are given by the GoK  to BESCOM.  Among the practical  and 
technological barriers  is the fact that  when the renewable  sources and other non -fossil fuel 
sources are integrated to the grid infrastructure , it could lead to grid congestion and disrupt 
the network. For a fast-growing city like Bengaluru, space availability for large deployments is 
challenging , and in the absence of domestic production , there will be increasing import 
dependenc y for renewa ble energy,  which could threaten energy security.   
 
Barriers to achieving 50% improvement in industrial energy efficiency  
Energy efficiency is a low-hanging fruit  for limiting  the global temperature rise . However , 
improvements are not fast enough due to several barriers. MSMEs are unorgan ised in nature 
and it is challenging to implement regulatory and reporting frameworks. Financial barrier s 
are a major impediment in improving  energy efficiency. Most MSMEs have a high capital 
requirement , as electricity -based technologies invariably require a higher initial investment 
than  fossil fuel -based technologies. The finances available do not consider the complexities of 
being part of a larger supply chain. Another key barri er is the availability of commercially 
viable technologies for MSMEs , and they have limited support in terms of active technical 
assistance in order to adopt new technologies.   
 
Barriers to achieving 90% transition to electric cooking in both residential and 
commercial buildings by 2050  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   147  
Transitioning to a future where cooking needs are met in a way that is economically, socially, 
and environmentally sustainable  is an ideal goal. E -cooking concept may offer significant 
potential for a transition to emission free cooking, however, achieving such transition requires 
certain barriers to be tackled. Financial barrier to adopt such transition can be highlighted 
especially  in the low -income groups, as the ability to pay the increase in the electricity costs 
will be challenging  if the recent ly int roduced subsidies are not continued . There  are cultural 
and behavioural  barriers, such as a resistance to induction cooking  due to the  belief that 
modern appliances change the taste of food even if the same condiments and methods  are 
used . There are also technological barriers, such as the  aggregation of mass adoption of 
induction cooking / electric cooktops increasing  the demand for electricity and posing a risk 
to the grid transmission structure.  
 
 
Barriers to accelerate vehicular shift to cleaner fuel ( electric and  hydrogen ) to 
100% by 2050  
Although there is a  push from the national and the state government s to promote the use of 
cleaner fuel vehicles (such as EVs), there are multiple hurdles in  the real isation of these 
objectives. Some key legal and institutional barriers include the ineffective implementation of 
the Karnataka EV Policy 2017 , due to the lack of robust institutional mechanisms, expensive 
or cumbersome processes to get electricity connection s for EV charging facilities,  the lack of a 
conducive ecosystem for retrofitting vehicles currently running on fossil fuels, and lack of 
awareness and polic y support for emerging cleaner fuels such as hydrogen . The h igher 
purchase price of EVs, limited subsidies provided to EVs, and customers’ lack of awareness on 
the lifecycle and resale cost of EVs are some  key financial and economic barriers holding back 
this objective. There are  also a  few social barriers which impact consumer sentiment , including  
range anxiety, perceived  safety concerns , and the availability of an ecosystem for servicing, 
repair and maintenance. In addition to  the above -mentioned concerns , there are some  
practical and technological barriers  as well,  such as the limited availability and accessibility of 
charging infrastructure, limited availability of raw materials required for the production of EV 
batteries , and technical challenges in the commercial production, storage and transportation 
of hydrogen.  
 
Barriers to accelerate 100% energy recovery from scientific landfill s to 
achieve net zero waste  
 
Bengaluru's scientific landfill management faces multiple challenges , despite efforts to achieve 
100% waste segregation and increased processing. The Mavalipura and Mandur landfills have 
remained unscientific and closed for over a decade, while the current landfill lacks proper 
management. The new draft BBMP SWM Bye-laws  priorit ise bioremediation over scientific 
landfills and energy recovery, adding to the legal and institutional barriers. Guidelines for 
buffer zones released in 2014 have not effectively streamlined landfill management. The 
implementation of provisions from the Municipal Solid Waste  (MSW ) Rules, 2016, including 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   148  
site selection, monitoring, safety measures, pollution prevention, and water quality 
monitoring, is crucial. The communication gap between the centre , state, and city further 
complicates the situation. Financial and economic constraints hinder landfill construction, 
while the bioremediation of closed landfills requires support from public -private partnerships 
(PPP). Political and social barriers exist,  necessitating stronger capacities within urban local 
bodies and increased political support for waste mana gement. Limited awareness has led to 
unutil ised funds allocated for awareness campaigns. Citizen engagement, public awareness, 
and responsible consumer behaviour  need to be improved  in order to achieve  100% energy 
recovery. Additionally, technical expertise and land availability pose significant practical 
challenges.  
 
Barriers in increasing anaerobic treatment with biogas capture  
Despite increasing centralised wastewater treatment facilities, the major legal and 
institutional barriers in wastewater treatment in Bengaluru stem from the city's primary focus 
on basic water and sanitation services, overlooking the potential for mitigat ion through 
wastewater treatment. The financial structure for sewage treatment plants (STPs) requires 
analysis to ensure their proper functioning. The Water Act of 1974 addresses water pollution 
but lacks emphasis on resource recovery from wastewater. The absence of a central -level policy 
mandate and regulatory framework for wastewater treatment has led  to neglect in this area. 
The Karnataka State Water Policy of 2019 promotes innovative and cost -effective approaches 
to wastewater treatment, but implementing less expensive anaerobic treatment and biogas 
capture presents challenges. Financial and economic barriers hinder the implementation of 
anaerobic wastewater treatment with biogas capture due to higher capital and operational 
costs. Political and social barriers involve raising awareness about emission reduction and the 
lack of skilled labour  for STP operation. Upgrading drainage and infrastructure to direct 
sewage flow to STPs is also challenging. Practical and technological barriers include the 
feasibility issues of anaerobic treatment with gas capture, which requires more manpower and 
space . Additionally, the decentral ised nature of STPs limits the provision of gas capture, 
resulting in limited upgrades up to nitrification.  
4.3  Impact of future GHG emissions on Bengaluru’s air quality and public health  
According to an analysis done by C40 using the Pathways -AQ Rapid Scoping Tool, a ir 
pollutant emissions are projected to grow. Annual average PM2.5 concentrations under the 
BAU scenario are expected to increase by 8 % between 2019 and 2030, 7% between 2030 and 
2040, and another 7% between 2040 and 2050 (Figure 56). 
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   149  
Figure 56 BAU PM2.5 concentration estimate  
 
Source: C40 Cities Pathway s AQ Analysis   
 
 
While the E&P scenario is likely to make a positive impact on air quality and health in 
Bengaluru by 2050, it will still not do enough to lower PM2.5 concentrations to meet the World 
Health Organization’s (WHO) ambient air quality interim target 3 (35 ug/m3). 
 05101520253035404550
2019 2030 2040 2050Annual average PM2.5 concentration (µg/m3 ) Grid Electricity Individual generators
Agriculture, Forestry, and Land Use Industrial Processes and Product Use
Waste Waterborne
Railways On-road
Manufacturing Industries, Construction and Other Industry Commercial
Residential Non-modelled
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   150  
Figure 57 Change in PM2.5 concentration per action for the E&P scenario  
 
Source: C40 Cities Pathway s AQ Analysis  
 
 
The ambitious scenario is projected to deliver air pollution reductions that are nearly double 
of those expected under the E&P scenario. PM2.5 concentrations from in -city emission 
sources are expected to decrease by 4 μg/ m3 (11%) in 2030, 7 μg/m3 (18%) in 2040, and 11 
μg/m3 (26%) in 2050, as a result of ambitious scenario implementation (see Figure 58). The 
reduction in air pollution would prevent nearly 5,500 annual premature deaths in 2050. The 
largest reductions in PM2.5 emissions and precursor pollutants are expected to come from on -
road transportation, mainly by switching diesel buses to natural gas , electricity  and hydrogen , 
and imposing stricter emissions standards on vehicles, and in the industrial sector by reducing 
diesel generator use. The main  source of remaining emissions in 2050 will be  on-road 
transportation , as seen in Figure 59, with the largest contribution  being  from natural gas and 
diesel buses that have not been switched to electric, and from tyre and brake wear from all 
vehicle types. Even under the ambitious scenario, continued diesel use in the industrial sector 
will continue to create PM2.5 pollution in the city.    -3.0
-4.6
-6.5 -7.0-6.0-5.0-4.0-3.0-2.0-1.00.0
2030 2040 2050Annual PM2.5 concentration change (µg/m3)Individual Generators Distributed Renewables
Grid Decarbonization Agriculture, Forestry, and Land Use
Industrial Processes and Product Use Transport Fuel switch
Transport Mode shift Transport Trip reduction
Transport Emissions Standards Wastewater
Open Burning Incineration
Industrial Fuel switch Industrial Efficiency
New Commercial Existing Commercial
New Residential Existing Residential
Informal Settlements Total
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   151  
Figure 58 Change in PM2.5 concentration per action for the ambitious scenario  
 
Source: C40 Cities Pathway s AQ Analysis  
 
 
 -4.1
-7.2
-11.4
-14.0-12.0-10.0-8.0-6.0-4.0-2.00.0
2030 2040 2050Annual PM2.5 concentration change (µg/m3)Individual Generators Distributed Renewables
Grid Decarbonization Agriculture, Forestry, and Land Use
Industrial Processes and Product Use Transport Fuel switch
Transport Mode shift Transport Trip reduction
Transport Emissions Standards Wastewater
Open Burning Incineration
Industrial Fuel switch Industrial Efficiency
New Commercial Existing Commercial
New Residential Existing Residential
Informal Settlements Total
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   152  
Figure 59 Estimated sectoral contributions of PM2.5 air pollution in Bengaluru if ambitious scenario 
is completely implemented  
 
 
4.3.1  Summary of Pathways  AQ Integration Study results  
• By ranking the CAP actions by GHG and PM2.5 reductions, fuel shift in buses has the 
greatest co -benefits.  
• Ambitious and achievable actions are expected to improve air quality by reducing the 
annual PM2.5 concentration in Bengaluru , from sources included in the GPC 
inventory, by 11% in 2030, 17% in 2040 and 26% in 2050. The ambitious scenario 
actions will reduce 11.4 ug/m3 of PM2.5 concentration in 2050 compared to BAU in 
the same year.  
• In the ambitious scenario, most  of the total reductions are from the transport (69%) 
and industrial sectors (21%) by 2050.  
• Improved air quality from the selected ambitious and achievable actions are estimated 
to avoid 5, 500 premature deaths  (14%) in 2050 , as compared to the BAU.  
 
Refer  to Annexure  H for detailed technical specifications and summary of Pathways -AQ rapid 
scoping tool by C40 cities.  
 
 
 0.2
0.10.41.3
0.0 0.0
0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.4
Residential Commercial Manufacturing
Industries and
ConstructionOn-road Railways Individual
GeneratorsRemaining PM2.5 Concentration (µg/m3 )
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   153  
 
 
 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   154  
5 SECTORAL GOALS AND ACTIONS FOR MITIGATION AND 
ADAPTATION   
5.1 Identifying sectoral priorities  and barriers  
Based on the assessments  discussed in chapter s 2, 3, and 4 , the strategic approach, priority 
action areas or vision , and key barriers to implementation  of priority action areas for each of 
the seven sectors were identified.  Table 16 summarises these priorities  and barriers . 
Table 16 Sectoral priorities  and barriers  identified for each sector  
Sector  Sectoral Priority  
Energy and 
Buildings  (E&B)  Strategic approach : Adopt a multipronged approach to a low-carbon 
future by decarbon ising Bengaluru's grid electricity  and promoting energy 
efficiency, green and low -carbon buildings, and clean cooking fuels.   
 
Action priority:  Creation of  an enabl ing ecosystem for  a higher proportion of 
renewables in the grid ; transition to energy -efficient appliances ; affordable 
cleaner fuels ; norms for low -carbon and green buildings .  
 
Key barriers:  Lack of flexibility in energy operation systems ; rigid contracting 
protocols ; inadequate policies for assessing the environmental, social , and 
economic impact of renewables ; lack of push and incentives for energy -efficient 
buildings and energy -efficient appliances ; limited capacity and awareness of 
stakeholders , including citizens.   
Transport ation  
(T) Strategic approach:  Promote low -carbon mobility  solutions, with a  strong 
focus on  Public Transport (PT),  Non -Motor ised Transport 
(NMT)  infrastructure , and cleaner fuels for reducing GHG emissions, 
improving air quality , and enhancing Bengaluru’s liveability . 
 
Action priority:  Decarbon isation of  modes by switching from fossil fuels 
towards cleaner fuels and shifting from private modes to PT and NMT. The 
sector should also aim to increase  its resilience to climate hazards.  
 
Key barriers:  Lack of integration of land use and transport in city planning 
practices ; inadequate infrastructure ; behavioural  barriers to shift to public 
transport ; lack of knowledge capacity ; and fragmented institutional and 
governance ecosystem leading to non -implementation of progressive policies.  
Solid Waste 
Management  
(SWM)  Strategic approach:  Support and enhance circular economy, improved 
technology solutions and scientific waste management practices to achieve net 
zero G HG emissions from  the solid waste sector.  
 
Action priority:  Diversion  of waste from landfills , with 100%  segregation  of 
waste at source, improve ment of  resource recovery and the circular economy by 
promoting decentral ised waste management systems ; implement ation of  
scientific landfills  with gas capture and suitably  repurpose closed 
landfills/dump sites  by creating inclusive and hazard -resilient SWM 
infrastructure  and services.  
 
Key barriers:  Inadequate adoption of progressive policies and norms due to 
lack of awareness and stringent enforcement ; deficient infrastructure for 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   155  
sustainable waste management ; lack of capacity and insufficient working 
environment for SWM staff , leading to a lapse in waste management value 
chain.  
Air Quality  (AQ)  Strategic approach:  Maxim ise air quality improvement co -benefit 
opportunities from the BCAP by enabling a shift to clean energy, improved 
technology, appropriate urban planning and greening solutions , and 
improved monitoring systems.  
 
Action priority:  Prevent ion of  air pollution through stringent regulations and 
protocols ; mitigation of air pollution  through timely implementation of 
appropriate  measures ; build ing resilience through health check -up drives ; and 
build ing a robust monitoring network  (Ganguly, Kurinji, and Guttikunda 2020) .  
 
Key barriers:  Inadequate infrastructure ; lack of  data and practices for air 
quality monitoring ; lack of norms for indoor air quality management ; absence of 
a complete feedback loop and effective cross -stakeholder engagement ; 
constrained capacity in the city corporation.  
Water, 
Wastewater and 
Stormwater 
Management  
(W, WW,  SW)  Strategic approach : Enhance Bengaluru’s resilience to climate change by 
adopting an integrated urban water management approach  that  includ es 
freshwater, wastewate r,  and stormwater systems.  
 
Action priority:  Enhancing access to safe, equitable , and affordable water and 
sanitation to all by  diversifying and conserving water sources and  promoting the 
reuse of recycled wastewater by adopting improved  technologies and nature -
based solutions  to ensure water security, social equity , and minim isation of 
environmental impact.  
 
Key barriers:  Lack  of water policy ecosystem ; monitoring mechanisms leading 
to unequal and inefficient distribution ; ageing infrastructure, pricing non -
reflective of true cost of water ; non-diverse water portfolio ; lack of awareness 
and capacity to integrate natural resources in infrastructure and city planning , 
leading to degradation of resources ; lack of awareness and stakeholder 
consensus hampering progressive policies.  
Urban Planning, 
Greening and 
Biodiversity  
(UPGBD)  Strategic approach:  Improve Bengaluru’s climate resilience, liveability , and 
GHG mitigation potential by adopting climate -aware urban planning, 
greening , and biodiversity management measures.  
 
Action priority:  Improv ing the city ’s GHG mitigation potential through 
compact growth and land use -transport integration as well as enhancing tree 
cover to serve as carbon sinks ; improving  climate adaptation and resilience 
against  climate change  risks through nature -integrated planning and nature -
based solutions , to further  enhance  biodiversity conservation and overall 
liveability .  
 
Key barriers:  Non -aligned planning and policy instruments ; siloed 
operational practices in city agencies ; lack of data and inefficient enforcement , 
leading to unequal distribution of resources and higher risks to certain segment s 
of the population ; lack of awareness, knowledge , and capacity to include a 
climate change lens in urban planning practices ; governance complexities 
hampering integrated urban planning management and climate action.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   156  
Disaster 
Management  
(DM ) Strategic approach:  Make Bengaluru a  proactive city supported by data -
led and citizen -centric planning which is well prepared to efficiently reduce 
vulnerabilities and risks from extreme climate and environmental events , with 
zero loss of life and minimal loss to its natural resources and local economy.  
 
Action priority:  Development of  a comprehensive data -centric information 
system to warn people of a disaster ; an inclusive disaster risk reduction strategy , 
taking into consideration location -specific concerns and incorporating them into 
the strategy guide ; a plan for  equitable city-level relief and rescue , and post -
disaster loss and damage.  
 
Key barriers:  Absence of disaster -related policy and planning tools at 
appropriate spatial scale ; lack of incorporation of risk reduction into the urban 
planning process ; lack of decentralised infrastructure ; inadequate coordination 
between stakeholders ; lack of awareness on standard operating protocols among 
citizens ; inequitable and insufficient resources planning and distribution ; 
lacking governance , capacity , and monitoring systems , leading to insufficient 
assessment of loss and damage.  
5.2 Framing of actions under the BCAP : A holistic approach   
The i dentification and detailing of actions comprise  the main output of a climate action plan. 
It is a logical process informed by a series of activities conducted and outputs derived  from 
them,  culminating in the  identification of areas of intervention to achieve the two key 
objectives, i.e., the mitigation of GHG emission s and the reduction of risk from climate change 
by enhanc ing the  adaptive capacity of the city and its population. As illustrated in previous 
chapters, the mitigation goal of the BCAP is primarily informed by the GHG inventory and 
Pathways assessment for future emission reduction scenarios. On the other hand, the 
adaptation and resilience goal of the BCAP is primarily informed by the Climate Change Risk 
and Vulnerability Assessment  (CCRA -VA).  
While the se exercises offered robust, data -based , and scientific assessments leading to the 
identification of BCAP targets (mostly quantitative) and action tracks, the identification of 
actions to reach those targets or address an action track in their entirety involved a deeper 
assessment of the ecosystem going beyond these measures. The three -pronged consultation 
conducted to prepare the BCAP  (refer section  1.2), along with a dissection of the sector -wise 
existing and emerging situation  (refer section -2.2), provided valuable inputs towards 
identifying key barriers and challenges in a sector, especially for those  to become climate 
progressive . These offered insights on contextual realities essential for evaluating actions for 
their sustainability, inclusivity, acceptance , and their merit to align themselves with a just 
transition.   
Barriers that could potentially lead to non -implementation of identified priority c limate action  
strategies in Bengaluru  can be broadly bucketed under the following types:  
1. Statutory and regulato ry barriers : These  include existing plans, policies, legal 
and regulatory instruments , and guidelines  that govern a sector . The challenge s with in 
this barrier are of three types: absence of  statutory  or regulatory instruments, 
inadequate or misaligned policies and regulations, and lack of enforcement or 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   157  
adoption of policies and regulations . While the first two need to be address ed at a 
design level, the third requires better capacity and awareness.   
2. Inadequate p rocesses  and  institutional mechanisms : These include  the lack 
of Standard Operating Procedures  (SOP s) and coordination between  government 
departments and agencies as well as between the government and non-government 
actors involved in implementation . This could lead to non -implementation or delayed 
implementation of actions resulting in non -achievement of climate action targets.  
3. Infrastructure  barriers : These refer to inadequate hard and soft infrastructure  and 
facilities critical for implementing  climate action targets  (e.g., improved air quality 
monitoring equipment  and limited availability of waste processing centres ).  
4. Capacity  barriers : These include  inadequate knowledge, skill s, and human 
resources needed for  implement ing climate action strategic priorities . Such capacity 
gaps exist in both state  and non -state actors , leading to non -utilisation of funds allotted 
and non -achievement of milestones against targeted timelines.  
5. Inadequate p latforms and data systems : While limited availability of reliable , 
consistent , and regular data is a constraint , lack of access to consistent data and 
analytics could lead to mis -informed decisions and  inadequate assessment of outputs 
and outcomes of actions.   
6. Lack of diversified funding sources : While there is funding available under 
programmatic umbrellas in each sector , mostly from government sources (i.e., city, 
state , and national government funding) , lack of diversification of funding portfolio 
with private  and market -based funding instruments could lead to higher risk of stalling 
of implementation in unforeseen circumstances.  
7. Inclusivity and equity  concerns : These  refer to concerns  regarding  the process of 
projectivisation and the implementation of climate actions as well as  the envisaged 
climate action outcomes. Issues of vulnerability in resilience actions and unfair 
transition pathways in mitigation actions could need to greater socio -economic 
exclusion and inequity, thus leading to the failure of  the BCAP as a politically and 
socially viable policy instrument.  
8. Lack of awareness : This comprises  lack of information, education , and effective 
communication regarding climate change and its impact,  as well as  sector -specific 
progressive policies. This  is a critical barrier which, if not addressed, could lead to the 
lack of ownership, enforcement , and adoption of climate actions by  stakeholders , 
including citizens , businesses , and political representatives.  
 
Understanding these barriers  enabled a holistic  360-degree approach to  the identification of 
actions , covering not only specific climate solutions but also specific actions to address the 
above -identified category of barriers . A mind  map was developed for action identification , 
with an array of possible action categories , spanning policies , capacities , institutional 
mechanisms , and so on. Further, a ctions were prioritised  based on their relative contribution 
to achieving respective targets, their chance of success , and the envisaged co -benefits ( for 
example,  some clean transp ort and urban greening actions will also help reduce  air pollution). 
A schematic of the action -framing process is illustrated in Figure 60. 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   158  
Actions across sectors identif y synergies between mitigation and adaptation to actively 
leverage interdependencies. The BCAP aims to achieve fair and equitable distribution of 
benefits. However, it is to be acknowledged that inclusion is a continuous process , not a one -
time activity. Hence, inclusivity must be enshrined at the projectification stage of certain 
actions during the implementation of the BCAP. Participation and consensus -building during 
the climate action project design and implementation proce ss will not only enhance success 
but also de -risk investments.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   159  
Figure 60 Action -framing process  
 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   160  
5.3  Sector -wise action recommendations  
 
The actions recommended are priorit ised into high, medium  and low based on the following:  
Figure 61: Action priorit isation  
High priority  Actions that have greater mitigation and adaptation potential, that need to be 
carried out  immediately.  
Medium priority  Actions with moderate mitigation and adaptation potential as compared to 
other actions . 
Low priority  Actions that have lower mitigation and adaptation potential as compared to 
other actions . 
 
The following section presents action tracks, goals, strategies , and actions recommended for 
each of the seven sectors considered under the BCAP.  Minutes of meeting s that were 
conducted with the departmental nodal officers and heads of the departments on March 8 and 
13, 2023 , to discuss  sector -wise  draft goals, targets , and actions under the BCAP  are attached 
in Annexure  G. 
Action s pertaining to inclusivity and IEC are highlighted below in the sector -wise  action 
recommendations .  
Inclusivity  
Information, Education and Communication  
Inclusivity and IEC  
 
 
  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   161  
5.3.1 Energy and buildings  
Approach  
The energy and building s sector  is the main  contributor to GHG emissions , and the 
interventions proposed are mainly categor ised under  the decarbon isation of the existing 
electricity grid, transitioning to energy -efficient appliances and zero -carbon -ready buildings, 
and capacity -building and development of resources through awareness campaigns and 
training workshops.  Figure 62 summarises  the approach.  
Figure 62: Approach for energy and buildings sector  
 
Sectoral action tracks  
No. Action track  
E&B -1 Achieve higher penetration of energy -efficient appliances and clean fuel transition in all 
major sub -sectors (residential, commercial, institutional, and industrial) . 
E&B -2 Promot e green and low-carbon buildings with passive  and active  design strategies . 
E&B -3 Increase the proportion  of non -fossil fuel sources in the city's grid electricity generation  to 
68% by 2030 and 89% by 2050 . 
E&B -4 Implement effective communication methods for nudging behavioural  changes by 
adopting behavioural  science principles through IEC program mes. 
E&B -5 Develop a programme  for affordable clean cooking fuel transition . 
 Decarbonize
Increase in % of 
non-fossil fuelTransition
Transition to energy -
efficient appliances 
and clean fuels in 
buildingsCapacity -building
Skill development of 
the workforce on 
new energy 
efficiency and green 
hydrogen .
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   162  
Track -wise actions  Priority  
S.No  Actions  Aligned 
with (ongoing 
initiatives/othe
r actions)  Responsible 
agency  
Primary (p) 
Secondary (s)  Potential 
source of 
funding  Output  Outcome  Co-benefit  Timeline  
(Targeted year 
of completion of 
action)  
E&B - 1: Achieve higher penetration of energy -efficient appliances and clean fuel transition in all major sub -sectors (residential, commercial, 
institutional, and industrial) . 
Goal/Target: 40% of new appliance technology will be of high -range energy efficiency by 2030 . 
  E&B 
1.1. Ensure the use of 
energy -efficient fixtures 
and appliances 
(especially cooling 
appliances) in all public 
buildings by 2030 .  a. Hosa 
Belaku Phase 
II scheme  
b. Energy 
Conservation 
and Energy 
Efficiency 
Policy 2022 -
2027  P: BBMP  
 
S: KREDL, 
BESCOM  a. Grants from 
Green Climate 
Fund and Green 
Energy Fund  
b. Carbon Cess  
c. Projects 
implemented 
under State 
Energy 
Conservation 
Fund  
d. Credit line/ 
loans from banks  
e. Corporate 
social 
responsibility 
funds  % increase in the 
energy -efficient 
fixtures and 
appliances in 
municipal and 
public buildings  % increase in 
energy savings  Accelerat ion 
of Smart 
Cities 
Mission  2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   163  
  E&B 
1.2 Conduct regular energy 
audits for all MSMEs 
consuming a load of 
100KW or more, to 
assess assets and 
processes , and create an 
institutional mechanism 
to make audits  
mandatory. The nodal 
agency for  the Perform  
Achieve Trade  (PAT ) 
Scheme (KREDL) can 
prepare and provide the 
Energy Audit guideline 
manual as per the  
notification of the  
Bureau of Energy 
Efficiency  (BEE ) on the 
manner and periodicity  
for conducting energy 
audits.  a. PAT 
Scheme  
b. SME 
division 
schemes  P: BBMP, 
Department 
of Industry 
and 
Commerce  
 
S: KREDL, 
MSME 
Developmen
t Institute, 
KSPCB  a. Technology 
and Quality 
Upgradation 
Support Scheme  
b. National Small 
Industries 
Corporation 
(NSIC) schemes  
c. Coir Udyami 
Yojana  a. Approved 
institutional 
mechanism  for 
energy audits  
b. Number of 
MSMEs audited  a. Reduce d 
energy and 
production 
costs  
b. Increas ed 
lifespan of 
equipment  
c. Operational 
performance 
improvements 
in MSMEs  
d. Increase in 
low-carbon 
fuels  a. Improved 
indoor 
occupancy  
comfort  
b. Reduce d 
GHG and 
ambient air 
pollutant 
emissions  
c. Improved 
health  2030  
  E&B 
1.3 Encourage shift to 
electric motor -driven 
systems from fossil -fuel 
driven systems in all 
PAT and Non -PAT 
industries.  a. PAT 
Scheme  
b. SME 
division 
schemes  P: BBMP, 
Department 
of Industry 
and 
Commerce  
 
S: KSPCB  a. Technology 
and Quality 
Upgradation 
Support Scheme  
b. National Small 
Industries 
Corporation 
(NSIC) Schemes  
c. Coir Udyami 
Yojana  
d. Credit Linked 
Capital Subsidy 
(CLCS) for a. % increase in 
electric  motor -
driven  systems 
in PAT and Non -
PAT  industries  a. Operational 
performance 
improvements 
in MSMEs 
(reduce d 
energy and 
production 
costs)  a. Improved 
indoor 
occupancy  
comfort  
b. Reduce d 
GHG and 
ambient air 
pollutant 
emissions  
c. Improved 
health  2035  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   164  
Technology 
Upgradation  
  E&B 
1.4 Establish ‘energy 
management cells’ at the 
MSME cluster levels to 
promot e ‘Zero Defect 
Zero Effect 
Manufacturing (ZED) ’ a. PAT 
Scheme  
b. MSME 
Sustainable 
(ZED) 
Certification  P: BBMP, 
Department 
of Industry 
and 
Commerce  
 
S: KSPCB  a. Technology 
and Quality 
Upgradation 
Support Scheme  
b. National Small 
Industries 
Corporation 
(NSIC) schemes  
c. Coir Udyami 
Yojana  a. Energy 
Management 
cell in every 
MSME cluster 
within the 
BBMP boundary  
b. Number of 
industries 
adopting ZED  a. Operational 
performance 
improvements 
in MSMEs 
(reduce d 
energy, 
production 
costs , etc.)  a. Reduce d 
GHG and 
ambient air 
pollutant 
emissions  
b. Improved 
health  
c. Reduce 
negative 
effects on 
environmen
t 2030  
  E&B  
1.5 Ensure the replacement 
of existing conventional 
electricity meters with 
digital ones . Create 
advanced metering 
infrastructure to enable 
a bidirectional flow of 
information and power. 
Advanced metering 
infrastructure includes 
integrated billing 
application  and user a. Energy 
Conservation 
and Energy 
Efficiency 
Policy 2022 -
2027  P: BESCOM  a. BESCOM 
Budget  a. Number of 
houses using 
electricity 
meters ( digital ) 
b. Integrated 
customer billing 
services app  a. Swift billing 
and robust 
tracking 
system   
b. Improve d 
demand -side 
management 
system  
c. Accurate 
data available 
on 
consumption 
and load  a. Improve d 
data 
collection 
and 
repository  
b. Reduce d 
carbon 
footprint  2027  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   165  
interface tracking  using 
IoT. 
  E&B  
1.6 Incentiv ise citizens to 
achieve a behavioural  
shift towards energy -
efficient appliances  
especially cooling 
appliances . Program mes 
such as  the ‘exchange 
premium concept ’ to 
increase the uptake of 
energy -efficient 
appliances. The 
premium would provide 
a higher subsidy to low -
income groups. KREDL 
to provide guidelines 
and technical support 
for the BBMP to take up 
the initiati ve. a. Pavan 
Scheme  
b. Hosa 
Belaku II 
Scheme  
c. Energy 
Conservation 
and Energy 
Efficiency 
Policy 2022 -
2027  P: BBMP  
 
S: BESCOM, 
KREDL  a. Grants from 
Green Climate 
Fund and Green 
Energy Fund  
b. Carbon Cess  
c. Projects 
implemented 
under State 
Energy 
Conservation 
Fund  
d. Credit line/ 
loans from banks  
e. Corporate 
Social 
Responsibility 
funds  a. Number of 
program mes or 
schemes for 
incentiv isation  
b. Number of 
people 
participating in 
the program me 
or schemes  
c. % increase in 
the number of 
energy -efficient 
appliances  a. % increase in 
energy savings  
  a. Smart 
Cities 
Mission 
accelerated   
b. Uptake of 
circular 
economy  
c. Reduce d 
carbon 
footprint  
d. Improve d 
standard of 
living  2035  
  E&B 
1.7 Develop a low-cost 
financing scheme for the 
uptake of energy a. Pavan 
Scheme  
b. Hosa P: BBMP  
 a. Municipal 
corporation 
budget  a. Number  of 
low-cost 
financing a. 
Improvements 
in the uptake of a. Smart 
Cities 
Mission 2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   166  
efficiency projects via a 
special property tax 
assessment or utility 
bill, especially for 
MSMEs and low -income 
group households . Belaku II 
Scheme  
c. Energy 
Conservation 
and Energy 
Efficiency 
Policy 2022 -
2027  S: BESCOM, 
KREDL  schemes  
b. % of people 
participating in 
the scheme  energy 
efficiency 
appliances  
b. % increase in 
energy savings  accelerated  
b. Reduce d 
carbon 
footprint  
c. Improve d 
standard of 
living  
  E&B 
1.8 Conduct mandatory 
energy audits for all the 
public buildings with  a 
connected load of 
100kW or certain 
threshold to assess the ir 
energy efficiency  
potential . a. Smart City 
Missions  P: BBMP  
 
S: PWD  a. Municipal 
corporation 
budget  a. Number of 
public building s 
assessed  
b. % shift to 
energy -efficient 
buildings  a. Improve d 
evidence -based 
analysis and 
decisions  a. 
Accelerate d 
Smart Cities 
Mission  
b. Reduce d 
carbon 
footprint  2030  
  E&B  
1.9 Facilitate private 
players' involvement in 
municipal energy 
efficiency projects by 
creating a platform for 
them to be a part of the 
development, financing, 
and/or implementation 
of projects . a. Smart City 
Missions  P: BBMP  
 
S: KREDL  a. Municipal 
corporation 
budget  a. Budget 
allocation for 
the platform  
b. Develop and 
launch the 
platform  
c.  Suitable 
agreements/con
tracts for the 
private players  
drafted  a. Accelerate d 
energy 
efficiency 
project uptake  
b. Improve d 
PPP  a. 
Accelerate d 
Smart Cities 
Mission  
b. Reduce d 
carbon 
footprint  2030  
E&B -2: Promote green buildings and low-carbon buildings with passive and active design strategies . 
Goal/Target: By 2030, 42% of new residential buildings and 48% of new commercial buildings will adopt insulated walls and roofs, improved window 
technology, and improved  building services design  
  E&B 
2.1 Revision of BBMP 
building bye -law to 
include Eco Niwas 
Samhita as per the EC a. Energy 
Conservation 
Building 
Codes (ECBC ) P: BBMP  
 
S: KREDL  a. Municipal 
corporation 
budget  
b. Credit line/ a. Approved 
revision of 
BBMP building -
bye laws  a. Increase in 
the number of 
energy -a. Creation 
of green 
jobs  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   167  
Act Amendment , 2022 
to mandate the 
implementation of 
energy -efficient design 
in residential buildings.  b. Eco Niwas 
Samhita 
(ENS) Part 1 
and Part 2  loans from banks  
c. Corporate 
Social 
Responsibility 
funds – General  efficient  
buildings  
  E&B 
2.2 Enforce  the Karnataka 
Energy Conservation 
Building Code (KECBC) 
2018 within BBMP 
limits , since it is 
gazetted by the GoK  and 
its implementation is 
mandatory for 
commercial buildings.  a. ECBC  
b. ENS Part 
1 and Part 2  P: BBMP  
 
S: KREDL  a. Municipal 
corporation 
budget  
b. Credit line/ 
loans from banks  
c. Corporate 
Social 
Responsibility 
funds – General  a. % increase in 
ECBC -complian t 
commercial 
buildings  a. Increase in 
the number of 
energy -
efficient 
buildings  a. Creation  
of green 
jobs  2025  
  E&B 
2.3 Promote and incentiv ise 
the adoption of the 
'adaptive reuse 
architecture' concept to 
all existing and 
unused/old buildings to 
reduce  construction and 
demolition waste 
disposal to landfills.   a. ECBC  
b. ENS Part 
1 and Part 2  P: BBMP  
 
S: KREDL, 
PWD  a. Municipal 
corporation 
budget  
b. Credit line/ 
loans from banks  
c. Corporate 
Social 
Responsibility 
funds – General  a. % buildings 
adopting 
adaptive reuse 
architecture  
b. % increase in 
recycled/recycla
ble material 
used in building 
construction  
c. % reduction in 
construction 
waste  a. Increase in 
the number of 
green and  zero -
carbon -ready  
buildings  
b. Improve d 
landfill waste 
management  a. Creation  
of green 
jobs  
b. Improve d 
ambient air 
quality  2035  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   168  
  E&B 
2.4  Ensure that a portion 
(50%) of public 
building s' energy 
requirement is met with  
passive solar design 
concepts such as  rooftop 
solar power systems and 
solar water heaters.  a. ECBC  
b. ENS Part s 
1 and 2 P: BBMP  
 
S: BESCOM, 
KREDL  a. Municipal 
corporation 
budget  
b. Credit line/ 
loans from banks  
c. Corporate 
Social 
Responsibility 
funds – General  a. % of buildings 
adopting passive 
solar design 
concept  
b. % reduction 
in grid -
electricity 
consumption  a. % increase in 
energy savings  a. Creation 
of green 
jobs  2035  
  E&B 
2.5 Promote 
implementation  of low 
thermal mass design 
such as  clay and fly ash 
bricks over thermally 
massive materials such 
as concrete in all 
buildings  a. ECBC  
b. ENS Part 
1 and Part 2  P: BBMP  
 
S: KREDL, 
PWD  a. Municipal 
corporation 
budget  
b. Credit line/ 
loans from banks  
c. Corporate 
Social 
Responsibility 
funds – General  a. Number of 
promotions on 
ECBC and ENS  
b. Number of 
buildings 
adopting low 
thermal mass 
design  a. Improve d 
occupancy 
thermal 
comfort  
b. % increase in 
energy savings  a. Creation 
of green 
jobs  
b. Better 
indoor air 
quality  2035  
  E&B 
2.6 Revise the BBMP 
building bye -laws  to 
mandate the 
implementation/uptake 
of green roof systems for 
all new buildings beyond 
a certain footprint/roof 
area in line with Eco 
Niwas Samhita 
guidelines.  a. ECBC  
b. ENS Part 
1 and Part 2  P: BBMP  
 
S: KREDL  a. Municipal 
corporation 
budget  
b. Credit line/ 
loans from banks  
c. Corporate 
Social 
Responsibility 
funds – General  a. % green roof 
cover achieved  
b. Number  of 
suppliers 
providing 
automated 
irrigation 
systems for roof 
tops  a. % increase in 
green cover  
b. % reduction 
in heat island 
effects  a. Creation 
of green 
jobs  
b. Better 
indoor air 
quality  2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   169  
  E&B 
2.7 Offer incentives and 
subsidies to all 
stakeholders throughout 
the value chain  
(consumers, 
manufacturers, 
distributors, etc.) to 
ensure the uptake of 
non-VOC  (volatile 
organic compound)  
materials.  a. ECBC  
b. ENS Part 
1 and Part 2  P: BBMP  
 
S: KREDL, 
PWD  a. Municipal 
corporation 
budget  
b. Credit line/ 
loans from banks  
c. Corporate 
Social 
Responsibility 
funds – General  a. % of buildings 
using non -VOC  
materials  a. Improve d 
occupant 
health and 
indoor comfort  a. Better 
indoor air 
quality  2030  
  E&B 
2.8 Promote ECBC/ENS 
buildings in the city by 
providing incentives to 
building owners through 
instruments such as 
property tax rebates  and 
increase in FSI/FAR 
allowance. KREDL to 
prepare and provide the 
financial incentives 
guidelines for initiation.  a. ECBC  
b. Eco Niwas 
Samhita Part 
1 and Part 2  P: BBMP  
 
S: KREDL  a. Municipal 
corporation 
budget  
b. Credit line/ 
loans from banks  
c. Corporate 
Social 
Responsibility 
funds – General  a. % increase in 
ECBC and ENS 
compliance in 
the buildings  
b. % banks that 
are providing 
financial 
support  
c. Number of 
buildings in the 
financial 
incentives 
program me a. Improve d 
occupan ts’ 
indoor climate 
comfort  
b. Improve d 
the standard of 
living  a. Creation 
of green 
jobs  
b. Better 
indoor air 
quality  2030  
  E&B 
2.9 Mandate all HVAC 
buildings covered under 
the scope of ECBC and 
ENS to implement heat 
recovery ventilation 
(HRV) or energy 
recovery ventilation 
(ERV) by 2030.  a. ECBC  
b. Eco Niwas 
Samhita Part 
1 and Part 2  P: BBMP  
 
S: KREDL  a. Municipal 
corporation 
budget  
b. Credit line/ 
loans from banks  
c. Corporate 
Social 
Responsibility 
funds – General  a. % of 
HRV/ERV 
implementation 
in the buildings  a. % increase in 
energy savings  a. Better 
indoor air 
quality  2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   170  
  E&B 
2.10  Subsid ise reversible 
ceiling fans for most 
vulnerable people and 
low-income groups ; the 
fans are used to circulate 
indoor air and can be 
used in both hot and 
cold  seasons.   a. ECBC  
b. Eco Niwas 
Samhita Part 
1 and Part 2  P: BBMP  
 
S: BESCOM, 
KREDL  a. Municipal 
corporation 
budget  
b. Credit line/ 
loans from banks  
c. Corporate 
Social 
Responsibility 
funds – General  a. Approved 
subsid isation of 
reversible ceiling 
fans  
b. % users of 
reversible ceiling 
fans  a. Improve d 
occupancy 
thermal  
comfort  
b. % increase in 
energy savings  
  2030  
  E&B 
2.11 Conduct IEC campaigns 
to sensit ise all relevant 
stakeholders on a) low-
carbon buildings, b) 
Smart building 
concepts, c) green 
buildings  a. ECBC  
b. Eco Niwas 
Samhita Part 
1 and Part 2  P: BBMP  
 
S: All other 
agencies  a. Municipal 
corporation 
budget  
b. Credit line/ 
loans from banks  
c. Corporate 
Social 
Responsibility 
funds – General  a. % of new 
buildings 
complying with 
ECBC  
b. % of existing 
buildings 
retrofitting 
buildings to 
ECBC compliant  a. % increase in 
energy savings  a. 
Accelerate d 
Smart Cities 
Mission  2030  
  E&B 
2.12  Develop energy auditing 
guidelines and 
implement energy 
auditing measures in all 
buildings . a. ECBC  
b. Eco Niwas 
Samhita Part 
1 and Part 2  P: BEE  
 
S: KREDL, 
BBMP    a. Approved  
guidelines and 
measures  a. Increase in 
ECBC and ENS 
compliant 
buildings  
b. % increase in 
energy savings  a. Creation 
of green 
jobs  2030  
 E&B  
2.13  Review the scope of 
ECBC and ENS to assess 
feasibility of including 
certain aspects of energy 
efficiency in the existing 
building stock. This 
should be done based on 
an in -depth study of 
existing commercial and 
residential building a. ECBC  
b. Eco Niwas 
Samhita Part 
1 and Part 2  P: KREDL  KREDL’s Own 
funds  a. Updated 
ECBC  
b. Updated ENS  a. Increase in 
ECBC and ENS 
compliant 
buildings  
b. % increase in 
energy savings  
 
 
 
 a. Better 
indoor air 
quality  2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   171  
stocks in Bengaluru and 
their present status of 
energy efficiency.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E&B -3: Increase the mix of non -fossil fuel sources in the city's grid electricity generation  to 68% by 2030 and 89% by 2050 .  
  E&B 
3.1 Ensure  that by 2035, 
50% of BESCOM's grid 
electricity is from  a 
decentral ised renewable 
resource network , while 
enhancing service 
delivery potential.    P: Energy 
Department - 
GoK , KPTCL  
 
S: BESCOM  GoK Budget  a. % increase in 
private suppliers 
for renewable 
energy ( RE) 
b. % increase in 
the expansion of 
hybrid RE plants  
c. % of RE 
energy in the 
grid mix  a. % GHG 
emission s 
reduction  
b. Accelerate d 
decarbon isatio
n a. Reduction 
in ambient 
air pollution  
b. Creation 
of green 
jobs   2035  
  E&B  
3.2 Conduct a study to 
assess the capacity of 
existing  grid 
infrastructure  before 
tendering out solar and 
wind projects to 
BESCOM    KPTCL  GoK Budget  a. % readiness of 
grid 
infrastructure 
for variable 
renewable 
energy ( VRE ) 
b. % increase in 
the number of 
energy storage 
systems  a. % reduction 
in curtailment 
of VRE  a. Creation 
of green 
jobs  2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   172  
  E&B  
3.3 Develop a roadmap to 
phase out thermal power 
plants  (TPPs) . Prepare a  
thermal power plant 
transition plan , under 
which older and 
inefficient thermal 
plants are progressively 
retired and newly 
established thermal 
power plants continue to 
supply base load.    P: Energy 
Department - 
GoK , KPCL  
 
S: KPTCL, 
PCKL  GoK Budget  a. Approved 
roadmap  
b. Number of 
inefficient 
thermal power 
plants retir ed a. % 
Improvement 
in power 
generation 
efficiency  
b. % 
Improvement 
in water 
resource 
management of 
TPP s a. Reduction 
in ambient 
air pollution  2030  
  E&B  
3.4 Establish an Integrated 
Renewable Energy 
Resource Management 
(IRERM) cell for the city 
through the 
collaboration of BBMP 
(town planning and 
revenue department), 
BESCOM, KREDL, and 
other key stakeholders. 
This cell will develop a 
roadmap to increase the 
city's renewable energy 
potential.  a. Karnataka 
Renewable 
Energy Policy  
b. Har Ghar 
Solar Mission  
c. Jawaharlal 
Nehru 
National 
Solar Mission 
(JNNSM)  P: BBMP  
 
S: BESCOM, 
KREDL  a. Municipal 
corporation 
budget  
b. GoK Budget  a. IRERM cell  
b. Number of 
stakeholders in 
the cell  
c. Approved 
roadmap  
d. % increase in 
uptake of off -
grid renewable 
energy plants  a. % 
Improvement 
in multi -
sectoral 
coordination  a. Reduction 
in ambient 
air pollution  
b. Creation 
of green 
jobs   2027  
  E&B  
3.5 Ensure implementation 
of utility -scale energy 
storage for load or 
supply, to enhance the 
power generation 
flexibility of rooftop 
solar systems and other a. Karnataka 
Renewable 
Energy Policy  
b. Har Ghar 
Solar Mission  
c. JNNSM  P: BESCOM  
 
S: KREDL, 
BBMP, PWD  GoK Budget  a. % increase in 
utility -scale 
storage  
b. % reduction 
in peak loads  a. % reduction 
in GHG 
emissions  
b. % reduction 
in power 
outages  a. Reduction 
in ambient 
air pollution  
b. Creation 
of green 
jobs   2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   173  
renewable energy 
sources.  
  E&B  
3.6 EV charging stations to 
be mandated to source a  
portion (50%) of its 
electricity through 
rooftop solar energy.  a. Karnataka 
Renewable 
Energy Policy  
b. JNNSM  P: BESCOM  
 
S: BBMP, 
PWD  a. Municipal 
corporation 
budget  
b. GoK Budget  a. % of EV 
stations with 
rooftop solar 
power systems  
b. % Increase in 
rooftop solar 
systems  a. % reduction 
in peak loads 
in grid 
infrastructure  
b. % reduction 
in GHG 
emissions  a. Reduction 
in ambient 
air pollution  
b. Creation 
of green 
jobs   2030  
  E&B  
3.7 Reduce the up -front cost 
of rooftop solar systems 
and installation charges 
by promoting 
collaborations  and 
developing platforms  to 
facilitate largescale 
uptake through bulk 
purchases . a. Karnataka 
Renewable 
Energy Policy  
b. Har Ghar 
Solar Mission  
c. JNNSM  P: BBMP  
 
S: BESCOM, 
KREDL  a. Municipal 
corporation 
budget  
b. GoK Budget  a. Approved 
bulk purchasing 
platform  
b. % of people 
enrolled in the 
platform  a. Increase d 
rooftop solar 
systems uptake  a. Reduction 
in ambient 
air pollution  
b. Creation 
of green 
jobs   2030  
 E&B  
3.8 Develop a roadmap to 
manage the potential ly 
massive volumes of solar 
panels and storage 
battery waste  
threatening to 
overwhelm landfill s.  a. Karnataka 
Renewable 
Energy Policy  
b. Har Ghar 
Solar Mission  P: Energy 
department - 
GoK  
 
S: KREDL, 
BESCOM, 
BBMP  a. GoK Budget  
b. Municipal 
corporation 
budget  a. Approval of 
guidelines  a. % reduction 
in e-waste  
b. Improve d 
hazardous 
waste handling  a. Creation 
of green 
jobs  
b. Better 
solid waste 
managemen
t 2030  
 E&B 
3.9 Operationalise Green 
Energy Open Access 
(GEOA) rules, so that a. Karnat aka 
Electricity 
Regulatory P: BESCOM, 
KERC    
  a. Open access to 
electricity 
from a. Greater 
access to 
affordable a. Creation 
of green 
jobs  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   174  
smaller consumers can 
also enter into contracts 
with RE generators.  Commission 
(Terms and 
Conditions 
for Green 
Energy Open 
Access 
(GEOA)  
Regulations, 
2022  S: Energy 
Department, 
BBMP  renewable 
sources  renewable 
energy  
E&B -4: Implement effective communication methods for nudging behavioural  changes by adopting behavioural  science principles through IEC 
programs . 
  
  E&B  
4.1 Conduct IEC campaigns 
to sensit ise financiers 
such as banks to provide 
low-cost loans for the 
uptake of green 
technologies and 
business models.    P: BBMP, 
KREDL  
 
S: Financial 
institut ions GoK Budget  a. Number of 
trainings and 
workshops  
b. Number of 
banks and 
financial 
institut ions 
participating  a. 
Improvement 
in financial 
assistance for 
RE projects  a. Creation 
of green 
jobs  
b. 
Accelerate 
Smart Cities 
Mission  2030  
  E&B  
4.2 Conduct an annual 
flagship event to engage 
with organ isations and 
people involved in 
rooftop solar and 
promote rooftop solar 
deployment.    P: BESCOM  
 
S: KREDL  GoK budget  a. Number of 
events 
conducted  
b. % people 
participating 
and 
organ isations 
attending the 
events  a. Better 
informed 
citizens and 
stakeholders , 
with respect to  
brands and 
technologies  a. Creation 
of green 
jobs  
b. 
Accelerate d 
Smart Cities 
Mission  2027  
  E&B  
4.3 Conduct regular ( half 
yearly) capacity -building 
workshops to upskill the 
technical knowledge of 
shop floor technicians a. Building 
awareness on 
intellectual 
property 
rights (IPR s) P: 
Department 
of Industry 
and 
Commerce  GoK budget  a. % MSME 
cluster s covered  
b. Number of 
shop floor a. Improve d 
skills  
b. Increase d 
energy savings  a. Creation 
of green 
jobs  
b. % 
reduction in 2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   175  
pertaining to energy 
efficiency.  b. Lean 
manufacturin
g 
competitivene
ss for MSMEs   
S: BBMP  technicians 
participating  GHG and 
air pollution  
emissions  
  E&B  
4.4 Develop an open access 
platform and maintain  
information on different 
rooftop solar system s 
and hot heaters 
vendors/service 
providers .   P: BESCOM  
 
S: KREDL  GoK Budget, 
BESCOM Budget  a. Approved 
platform  
b. % increase in 
uptake of 
rooftop solar 
systems and 
solar water 
heater  a. Improve d 
local business  a. Creation 
of green 
jobs  
b. % 
reduction in 
GHG and 
air pollution  
emissions  2027  
  E&B  
4.5 Conduct R&D activities 
to understand the 
barriers/gaps that 
hinder  household s from  
taking up  eCooking. 
Devise measures to 
support its adoption 
accordingly.  a. Go Electric 
campaign - 
eCooking 
devices  P: BBMP  
 
S: KREDL, 
BESCOM  GoK Budget  a. Approved 
number of R&D 
activities  
b. % increase in 
the uptake of 
electric cooktops  a. % Increase 
in energy 
savings  a. Reduction 
in indoor air 
pollution  
b. Improve d 
women ’s 
empowerme
nt and 
health 
resilience  2027  
E&B -5: Develop a programme  for affordable clean cooking fuel transition .  
Goal/Target: 100% transition from solid fuel to clean cooking fuel by 2030 . 
  E&B  
5.1 Prohibit the use of solid 
biomass for all 
purposes. Regulate the 
usage of solid biomass in 
hard -to-abate sectors 
such as  eateries 
(cooking)  and kerbside  
ironing (heating).  a. PMUY  P: BBMP  
 
S: Food and 
Civil 
Supplies 
Department , 
Forest 
Department  a. GoK fund  
b. Municipal 
corporation 
budget  a. % reduction of 
types of solid 
fuels in the city  
b. % reduction 
in 
establishments 
selling solid fuel  a. Increase  in 
uptake of 
LPG/PNG and 
electric 
cooking  a. Reduction 
in indoor air 
pollution  
b. Improve d 
women ’s 
empowerme
nt and 
health 
resilience  
c. Improve d 2027  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   176  
standard of 
living  
  E&B  
5.2 Ensure newer 
appliances such as  
electric rice cookers and 
induction cookstoves are 
enrolled in energy star -
rated program mes. 
KREDL to share a 
proposal with  BEE for 
the enrolment  of electric 
rice cookers and 
induction cook stoves S 
and L (Standards  and 
Labeling)  program mes. a. Go Electric 
campaign – 
eCooking 
devices  
b. Standards 
and Labelling  
Schemes  P: BEE  
 
S: KREDL  a. GoK fund  a. % increase of 
electric cookers 
and induction 
stoves having 
energy efficiency 
ratings    A. 
Reduction 
in indoor air 
pollution  
b. Improve d 
women ’s 
empowerme
nt and 
health 
resilience  
c. Improve d 
standard of 
living  2035  
  E&B  
5.3 Monitor and streamline 
subsidies to focus on 
clean cooking energy 
rather than those for a 
particular fuel.  a. Go Electric 
campaign - 
eCooking 
devices  P: BBMP  a. GoK fund  
b. Municipal 
corporation 
budget  a. Approved 
subsidy  
b. Approved 
monitoring 
method      2027  
  E&B  
5.4 Develop a monitoring 
and evaluation 
framework that uses 
mixed methods to 
monitor clean fuel 
adoption and use  a. Go Electric 
campaign - 
eCooking 
devices  P: BBMP  
 
S: All other 
agencies  a. Municipal 
corporation 
budget  a. Approved 
framework  a. Increase in 
clean cooking 
fuel adoption    2025  
  E&B  
5.5 Incentiv ise service 
providers/vendors to 
provide free 
maintenance of cooking 
stoves to vulnerable 
communities and low -
income groups ; this can 
be done through tax a. Go Electric 
campaign - 
eCooking 
devices  P: BBMP  a. GoK fund  
b. Municipal 
corporation 
budget  a. Number of 
service 
providers/vendo
rs getting 
incentives  
b. Number of 
free a. Increase in 
cooking fuel 
efficiency    2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   177  
rebates , government 
subsidies, and other 
financial mechanisms.  maintenance 
provided  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   178  
5.3.2  Transportation   
 
Approach  
The BCAP has identified a four -pronged approach for arriving at actions to reduce emissions 
from the transport sector and build resilience against  climate change. This is based on the 
sectoral analysis, gap assessment , and barriers in the transport sector. Avoid, Shift,  and 
Improve  identifies three primary ways to reduce GHG emissions from transport on the 
demand  side.66 Bengaluru’s transport system is vulnerable to various climate hazards faced by 
the city; hence , it needs a resilient transport system to withstand and respond to the same. 
Figure 63 summarises  this four -pronged approach  (Mathew 2021)  (Phillip 2021) . 
Figure 63: Approach for sustainable transportation  
 
The action tracks and the actions listed below have been drafted considering the aspects of 
equity and inclusivity in the sector. A few of these key considerations include strategies 
relating to  age/ability/gender, recogn ising the need s of marginal ised and low -income 
communities and aimed at ensuring a just transition.  
Sectoral action tracks  
No. Action track  
T-1 Reducing travel distances and minim ising travel needs by adopting suitable urban 
planning measures, improving transport planning processes , and developing a 
coherent  policy ecosystem . 
T-2 Improving public transport ridership through multimodal integration and steering 
demand away from private vehicles . 
T-3 Improving NMT access and infrastructure for a healthier and safer city . 
T-4 Transitioning to cleaner and greener vehicles; and improving vehicle efficiencies 
through increased access to finance, policy enablers, incentives and promoting R&D . 
T-5 Transitioning to cleaner and greener freight services through policies, incentives , and 
fleet management . 
T-6 Ensuring a resilient urban transport system to avoid service disruptions and damage of 
transport infrastructure during extreme weather events , which impact people, nature , 
and the economy of the city  
 
66 SUTP Module 5e - Urban Transport and Climate Change – SUTP ; GIZ Avoid
Reducing the need 
for travelling and 
minimizing travel 
distancesShift
Promoting modal 
shift from more 
energy -consuming 
modes (private) 
towards low -carbon 
modes (public and 
NMT)Improve
Improving vehicle 
fuel efficiency and 
vehicle technology 
(e.g., promoting 
cleaner fuels) Resilient
Ensuring safe and 
resilient transport 
infrastructure and 
services
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   179  
Track -wise actions  Priority  
S.No  Actions  Aligned with  
(Ongoing 
initiatives/other 
actions)  Responsible 
Agency  
Primary (P)  
Secondary (S)  Potential 
source of 
funding  Output  Outcome  Co-benefit  Timeline  
(Targeted 
year of 
completion of 
action)  
T- 1: Reducing travel distances and minim ising travel needs by adopting suitable urban planning measures, improving transport planning processes , 
and developing a coherent  policy ecosystem . 
Goal/Target: 92% of the new households in the city  (from 2019)  should be in Transit -Oriented Development areas by 2050 . 
  T 
1.1 Implement the approved 
TOD Policy for better land 
use transport integration . Integrated Land 
Use and 
Mobility Plan of 
CMP, 2020  P: DULT/BMLTA,  
 
S: BDA,  
Bengaluru  
International 
Airport Area 
Planning 
Authority  
(BIAAPA ), GoK , 
BBMP, BMRCL, 
KRIDE, BIAL, 
BMTC, KSRTC, 
BMRDA, BWSSB, 
BESCOM, KIADB, 
Bengaluru Traffic 
Police  
Other contributing 
agencies: DTCP, 
NHAI, PWD, Urban 
Development 
Department ( UDD ), 
KSDMA, KLCDA, 
KFD, KSPCB, KSFESD  GoK, 
BMLTA/  
Urban 
Transport 
Infrastructur
e Fund/  
planning/ 
implementin
g agency 
resources, 
PPP, other 
innovative 
funding 
mechanisms  a. Increase in 
ridership of PT  
b. No. of  
households  
within station 
areas  
c. % of 
commuters 
walking/cycling 
to and from 
metro stations  
d. Approved 
RMP 2041  
e. No. of TOD 
Corridor and 
Zone Plans  
(TZP) prepared 
and approved;  
f. No. of public -
sector and 
private -sector a. Increase in 
mode share 
of PT and 
NMT modes  
b. % increase 
in 
population/j
ob densities 
in TOD 
Zones 
(against 
baseline and 
non-TOD 
areas) or 
number of 
DUs and 
commercial 
floor space  a. Reduc ed 
air 
pollution  
b. Reduc ed 
congestion  
c. 
Reduction 
in travel 
time  
d. 
Reduction 
in urban 
sprawl  By 2035 , 
TZPs for 
all mass 
transit 
stations 
in the 
city 
should 
be 
prepared
, 
integrate
d with 
the RMP , 
and 
adopted . 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   180  
  T  
1.2 Ensure the integration of 
TOD Policy with the 
Masterplan (RMP , which is 
currently being revised) . Integrated Land 
Use and 
Mobility Plan of 
CMP, 2020  P: BDA  
 
S: All concerned 
development, 
regulating, and 
sectoral/line 
agencies  BDA's own 
funds  TOD 
schemes/project
s approved and 
implemented  
  T  
1.3 Prepare TOD Zone Plans  
(TZP)  to ensure higher 
FSI, higher densities and 
mixed -use development 
around mass transit 
stations (as per the TOD 
Policy) . Integrated Land 
Use and 
Mobility Plan of 
CMP, 2020  P: DULT/  
BMLTA,  
 
S: BDA, BIAAPA, 
GoK , all 
concerned 
development, 
regulating, and 
sectoral/line 
agencies  GoK, 
BMLTA/DU
LT's own 
funds, BDA's 
own funds  
  T  
1.4 Design a  Green Credit 
Scheme  to incentivise 
employers to adopt remote 
work policy to reduce work 
trips    P: GoK   
 
S: Transport 
Department, 
Finance 
Department  , 
BBMP, 
BMLTA/DULT  GoK  a. Green Credit 
Scheme  drafted , 
approved , and 
implemented  a. Reduction 
in number  of 
work trips  
b. Reduction 
in total 
number  of 
trips  
c. Reduction 
in number  of 
vehicles on 
road  a. Reduc ed 
air 
pollution  
b. Reduc ed 
congestion  
c. Reduc ed 
travel time  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   181  
  T 
1.5 Implement the approved 
BMLTA Bill and establish 
the authority for 
coordinated action among st 
different transport 
stakeholders . Governance 
Measures 
mentioned by 
CMP, 2020  P: UDD  
 
S: DULT  GoK, DULT's 
own funds  a. BMLTA Act  
b. Functioning 
BMLT Authority 
in the city  a. Increase d 
coordination 
amongst 
different 
stakeholders 
involved in 
transport 
plans, 
projects and 
policies in 
the city  a. Efficient 
and 
effective 
transport 
system in 
the city  2024  
  T  
1.6 Establish an  integrated 
project planning, 
management, 
monitoring, reporting 
and evaluation system  
for the transport sector.  
This system would measure 
and report the carbon 
footprint and air pollution 
data corresponding to each 
transport project in the city 
on an annual basis . Approved 
BMLTA Bill;  
Governance 
measures 
mentioned by 
CMP, 2020  P: BMLTA/DULT  
 
S: All service 
operators, 
transport 
planning , and 
regulatory 
agencies  GoK, 
BMLTA/ DU
LT’s own 
funds  a. Single 
platform for 
coordinated 
actions in the 
transport sector  
b. Identification 
of major GHG 
emitting/polluti
ng transport 
projects  a. Data -
driven 
decision -
making and 
transport 
planning  
b. 
Streamlined  
transport 
planning 
processes  a. Efficient 
use of time 
and 
resources  
b. 
Improved 
transport 
system  
c. 
Reduction 
in GHG 
emissions 
from 
transport 
sector  2030  
  T  
1.7 Create an integrated 
spatial database  for 
transport (parameters and 
indicators) , which is 
accessible and regularly 
updated by relevant  
stakeholder departments. 
This database will also be Regulatory 
measures 
mentioned by 
CMP, 2020  P: BMLTA/DULT  
 
S: All service 
operators, 
transport 
planning and 
regulatory 
agencies  GoK, 
BMLTA/DU
LT’s own 
funds  a. Single 
database for all 
transport -
related 
parameters and 
indicators 
related to the 
city, which is a. Data -
driven 
decision -
making and 
transport 
planning  
b. Ease of 
calculating  a. 
Improved 
transport 
system in 
the city  
b. 
Reduction 
in GHG 2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   182  
used to measure and report 
annual GHG emissions 
from the transport sector.  updated 
regularly  GHG 
emissions 
from 
transport 
sector in the 
city emissions 
from 
transport 
sector  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   183  
  T 
1.8 Conduct capacity -
building workshops  for 
officials of different 
stakeholder departments 
on TOD, MMI, and on 
planning, design, and 
engineering for more 
sustainable transport. The 
objectives of these 
workshops would vary for 
different levels of officials. 
They could focus  on need 
assessment, sensit isation , 
improving awareness , 
and/or  capacity -building.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Bengaluru TOD 
Policy  P: BMLTA/DULT  
 
S: All service 
operators, 
transport 
planning and 
regulatory 
agencies  BMLTA/DU
LT's own 
funds  a. No. of 
capacity -
building  
workshops 
conducted  a. Informed 
decision -
making/impl
ementation 
of transport 
projects/plan
s/policies  
b. Adoption 
of 
sustainable 
and 
improved 
transport 
planning 
framework/a
pproach in 
the city  a. Optim al 
use of 
resources  
b. 
Reduction 
in GHG 
emissions 
and air 
pollution  
c. 
Reduction 
in use of 
private 
vehicles  
d. Increase 
in PT and 
NMT usage  2025  
T- 2: Improving public transport ridership through multimodal integration and  demand management awa y from private vehicles . 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   184  
Goal/Target:  The combined share of public transport (PT) and non -motorised transport (NMT) in total no. of trips to be 75% by 2030, 80% by 2040, 85% 
by 2050.  
  T 
2.1 Revise, detail and  
implement CMP's Public 
Transport Improvement 
Plan to include the 
following mandates: 
improved network 
connectivity, optim ised 
capacities through 
rationalisation of services 
(routes and schedules), 
accessible and affordable 
first- and last-mile 
connectivity, seamless 
multimodal integration 
(MMI), enhanced 
commuter comfort, 
universally accessible 
infrastructure, energy 
efficient and reliability.  Public 
Transport 
Improvement 
Plan of CMP, 
2020  P: BMLTA/DULT  
 
S: Service 
operators 
(BMRCL, BMTC, 
KRIDE, KSRTC), 
BBMP, Traffic 
Police  Own funds of 
BMLTA/DU
LT, service 
operators 
and BBMP  a. % of 
population with  
access to PT 
stops (bus stops , 
metro stations , 
etc.) within 5 
minutes  of 
walking distance  
b. % of buses 
with ramps, 
special seats for 
women and the 
elderly and 
other special 
groups  
c. PT network 
density in low -
income areas  
d. level of a. Increased 
mode share 
of PT  
b. Increased 
PT ridership 
(disaggregate
d  
by gender 
and income 
level)  
c. Reduced 
fuel  
consumption  
d. Increased 
average 
travel  
speeds 
(kmph)  a. 
Reduction 
in air 
pollution  
b. 
Reduction 
in 
congestion  
c. 
Reduction 
in travel 
time  2028  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   185  
  T 
2.2 Create bus priority lanes as 
prescribed by CMP and  
improve services  by adding 
components such as safe 
and usable bus stops 
integrated with Passenger 
Information System ( PIS) 
interface, and clear 
signages to help commuters 
navigate  to improve  
efficiency and user 
experience  Public 
Transport 
Improvement 
Plan of CMP, 
2020  P: BBMP  
 
S: BMLTA/DULT, 
BMTC  Own funds of 
BBMP and 
BMLTA/DU
LT perceived 
comfort and 
quality of  
public transport 
service (safety, 
reliability, 
frequency, 
crowding, 
availability of 
seats) on 
services and 
routes used  2026  
  T 
2.3 Develop a commuter -facing 
platform for information 
dissemination  (PIS), 
common ticketing for all PT 
modes (along the lines of 
National Common Mobility 
Card ) and establish a 
commuter helpline to 
address grievances  and 
gather feedback on safety, 
access , and reliability . Technological 
Measures of 
CMP, 2020  P: BMLTA/DULT  
 
S: BMTC, 
BMRCL, KRIDE, 
KSRTC, IPT 
operators  BMLTA/DU
LT's own 
funds  a. Single public 
PIS 
interface/platfor
m for common 
ticketing and 
common 
helpline   
b. No. of users 
registered/using 
this interface  a. Increased 
commuter  
safety  
b. Increase in 
mode share 
of  
public 
transport  
c. Increased 
ridership  
(disaggregate
d by gender 
and  
income level)  
d. Reduction 
in waiting 
time  a. Quick 
and easy 
informatio
n 
disseminati
on during 
hazards  
b. 
Reduction 
in air 
pollution  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   186  
  T 
2.4 Create attractive ticket fare 
structure with targeted  
incentives to attract more 
commuters to use PT, 
especially those from 
marginalised  low-income 
groups, women, the elderly, 
children, etc.  Multi -Modal 
Mobility Plan 
and Regulatory 
Measures of 
CMP, 2020  P: BMLTA/DULT  
 
S: BMTC, 
BMRCL, KRIDE, 
KSRTC, IPT 
operators, 
Transport 
Department  GoK  a. No. of passes 
issued for low -
income groups, 
women , and the 
elderly  a. Increase in 
mode share 
of  
public 
transport  
b. Increased 
ridership  
(disaggregate
d by gender, 
income  
level)  
c. Decrease 
in % of 
monthly  
income spent 
on transport 
for these 
groups  a. Increase 
in 
employmen
t and 
education 
opportuniti
es 
b. Increase 
in monthly 
savings  2025  
  T 
2.5 Facilitate shift in incentives 
(provided by employers to 
employees ) away from  
private vehicles in favour of  
public transport. The scope 
of the Green Credit 
Scheme  should include 
this.  Action No. T 1.4 
(Green Credit 
Scheme)  P: GoK  
 
S: Transport 
Department,  
BBMP, 
BMLTA/DULT , 
Finance 
Department  GoK  a. Public 
transport 
allowance 
provided to 
employees  a. Increase in 
mode share 
of public 
transport  
b. Decrease 
in on -road 
private 
vehicles  a. 
Reduction 
in air 
pollution  
b. 
Reduction 
in 
congestion  
c. 
Reduction 
in fuel 
consumptio
n 2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   187  
  T 
2.6 Chalk out a detailed  IPT 
plan  for the city (along the 
lines of CMP) , which 
includes regulatory 
provisions and operational 
mechanisms for all IPT 
modes ( autorickshaws , e-
rickshaws, app -based taxis, 
etc.)  Public 
Transport 
Improvement 
Plan of CMP, 
2020  P: BMLTA/DULT  
 
S: Transport 
Department  BMLTA/DU
LT's own 
funds  a. Accessible 
and affordable 
IPT services  
b. Improved 
first- and last-
mile 
connectivity  a. Increase in 
mode share 
of public 
transport  
b. Decrease 
in on -road 
private 
vehicles  a. 
Reduction 
in air 
pollution  
b. 
Reduction 
in 
congestion  2025  
  T 
2.7 Identify new funding 
opportunities/mechanisms
/business models (PPP) for 
PT operations and 
maintenance . Fiscal measures 
of CMP, 2020  P: Transport 
Department,  
 
S: PPP , Finance 
Department  GoK  a. Increased 
investment in 
PT 
b. Increase in 
no. of PT 
vehicles on road  a. Increase in 
mode share 
of public 
transport  a. 
Reduction 
in air 
pollution  
b. 
Reduction 
in 
congestion  
c. 
Reduction 
in travel 
time  2026  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   188  
  T 
2.8 Create and implement a 
plan to restrict private 
vehicles plying in the city 
through strategies  such as:  
1) Creating congestion 
zones  and car-restricted 
zones , and implementing 
congestion charges ; 
2) Disincentivising private 
vehicles through 
instruments , such as  
annual licen ce fee, 
additional tax on 
purchasing vehicles 
(road/fuel taxes, etc .); 
3) Preparing and 
implementing area parking 
plans for all zones as per 
the Parking Policy 2.0 and 
enforcing on-site parking 
with stringent measures 
such as cut ting off power or 
water supply if not 
followed.  1) Private 
Transport 
Management 
Plan of CMP, 
2020  
2) Fiscal 
measures of 
CMP, 2020  
3) Parking 
Policy 2.0  P:BMLTA/DULT, 
BBMP  
 
 
S: 
1)Traffic Police  
2)GoK  
3)Traffic Police  
4)Transport 
Department  Own funds of 
BMLTA/DU
LT and 
BBMP. GoK 
funds  a. Increase in  
number of paid 
parking spots  
b. Number  of 
congestion/car -
restricted zones  
c. Area parking 
plans for all 
zones  a. Reduction 
in the no. of 
private 
vehicles on 
road  
b. Reduction 
in the no. of 
private 
vehicles 
registered  
c. Increase in 
the mode 
share of 
public 
transport  a. 
Reduction 
in 
congestion  
b. 
Reduction 
in air 
pollution  
c. Revenue 
generated 
through 
parking 
and 
congestion 
fees 2028  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   189  
  T 
2.9 Conduct a study on policy 
levers to disincentivise 
owning of more than one 
vehicle per household.    P: BMLTA/DULT  
 
S: Transport 
Department  BMLTA/DU
LT's own 
funds  a. No. of 
vehicles per 
household  a. Reduction 
in the no. of 
private 
vehicles on 
the road  
b. Reduction 
in the no. of 
private 
vehicles 
registered  
c. Increase in 
the mode 
share of 
public 
transport  a. 
Reduction 
in 
congestion  
b. 
Reduction 
in air 
pollution  2025  
  T 
2.10  Under the Green Credit 
Scheme , conduct a study 
to explore the feasibility of 
repurposing of large 
vehicles ( e.g., school buses ) 
to ferry corporate  
employees and vice versa , 
and to identify appropriate 
enabling mechanisms ( e.g., 
Revising RTO regulations, 
tax schemes ). Action No. T 1.4 
(Green Credit 
Scheme)  P: BMLTA/DULT,  
 
S: Transport 
Department  GoK, 
BMLTA/DU
LT's own 
funds  a. Feasibility 
study on 
repurposing 
vehicles for 
multiple uses  a. No. of 
vehicles 
repurposed  
b. Reduction 
in the no. of 
vehicles on 
road  a. 
Reduction 
in 
congestion  
b. 
Reduction 
in air 
pollution  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   190  
  T 
2.11 Training women drivers 
and incorporating 
components such as panic 
buttons and women -only 
compartments to improve 
women's safety and 
enhance uptake of PT 
amongst women .   P: BMTC, 
BMRCL, KRIDE  
 
S: Traffic Police, 
Transport 
Department  Service 
providers' 
(BMTC, 
BMRCL, 
KRIDE) own 
funds  a. No. of women 
drivers in PT 
modes  
b. Women only 
compartments 
or seats reserved 
for women in PT 
modes  
c. Availability of 
panic buttons in 
PT modes  a. Increased 
women ’s 
ridership in 
public 
transport  
b. Increased 
mode share 
of public 
transport  a. Increase 
in 
opportuniti
es for 
women 
(employme
nt, 
education)  
b. 
Reduction 
in air 
pollution  2026  
T- 3: Improving NMT access and infrastructure for a healthier and safer city . 
Goal/Target:  The combined share of public transport (PT) and non -motorised transport (NMT) in total no. of trips to be 75% by 2030, 80% by 2040, 85% 
by 2050.  
  T 
3.1 Approve the Active Mobility 
Bill and enforce it to create 
an enabling ecosystem to 
push for NMT modes .  Draft Active 
Mobility Bill  -
Karnataka, 2021  P: UDD  
 
S: BMLTA /DULT  GoK  a. Active 
Mobility Act 
implemented 
and enforced  a. 
Availability 
of safe and 
accessible  
NMT 
infrastructur
e 
b. Increase in 
the no. of 
NMT users  
c. Increased 
mode share 
of NMT  a. 
Reduction 
in air 
pollution  
b. 
Reduction 
in 
congestion  
c. Decrease 
in monthly 
transport 
expenditur
e for NMT 
users  
d. 
Reduction 
in fuel 
consumptio
n 2024  
  T 
3.2 The Green Credit 
Scheme  should include 
the aspect of offering 
incentives to NMT modes. 
For example, employers 
could provide benefits to 
employees in the form of 
allowances to buy bicycles , 
credits for walking, etc.  Action No. T 1.4 
(Green Credit 
Scheme)  P: Transport 
Department  
 
S: Finance 
Department , 
BBMP, 
BMLTA/DULT  GoK, 
Employers 
funds  a. Approved 
Green Credit 
Scheme  
includes 
incentives 
offered on NMT 
modes  
b. Incentives on 
using NMT 
offered by 
employers to 
employees  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   191  
  T 
3.3 Revisit the operational and 
regulatory provisions to 
encourage more public bike 
sharing (PBS) operators in 
the city and ease access to 
finance for them.  Non -Motorised 
Transport Plan 
of CMP, 2020  P: BMLTA/DULT,  
 
S: BBMP, 
Transport 
Department , 
Financial 
Institutions  GoK, PPP  a. More PBS 
operators in the 
city  
b. Improved 
access to PBS 
system  2025  
  T 
3.4 Prepare an  NMT master  
plan  for creating complete 
NMT infrastructure 
network (inclusive of 
footpaths, cycle tracks, 
underpass,  and junctions) 
throughout the city , which 
is accessible  by all users 
irrespective of age/ability. 
This should be integrated 
with the proposed Blue -
Green Policy  and 
associated NBS strategies .  *Aligned with 
action no. 
UPGBD 3.1  on 
Blue -Green 
Policy  
 
*Non -Motorised 
Transport Plan 
of CMP, 2020  P: BMLTA/DULT  
 
S: BDA, BBMP  Own funds of 
BMLTA/DU
LT, BBMP, 
BDA  a. NMT master  
plan integrated 
with the CMP 
and the 
proposed Blue -
Green Policy  2026  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   192  
  T 
3.5 Prepare a  ‘Complete 
Street ’ 
guideline/standards  
(along the lines of 
TenderSURE standards) 
and adhere to it for all 
roads.  
(A 'Complete Street' is one 
that is designed to cater to 
the needs of all users and 
activities, through 
equitable allocation of road 
space. Some of the main  
elements of Complete 
Streets are footpath, cycle 
track, pedestrian crossing, 
bus stops, median, utilities, 
streetlights, signages, etc.)  TenderSURE 
Guidelines  
 
Draft Active 
Mobility Bill  – 
Karnataka, 2021  
 
Non -Motorised 
Transport Plan 
of CMP, 2020  P: BMLTA/DULT  
 
S: BBMP  BMLTA/DU
LT's own 
funds  a. Complete 
Street guidelines 
for the city – 
drafted, 
approved and 
enforced  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   193  
  T 
3.6 Conduct regular NMT 
audits at local levels by 
creating a mechanism 
which involves public 
participation using  IT-
enabled systems/platforms 
(crowdsourcing 
mechanisms)    P: BMLTA/DULT  
 
S: BBMP  BBMP ’s own 
funds  a. Institutional 
mechanism and 
platform/interfa
ce for 
conducting 
regular NMT 
audits  2026  
  T 
3.7 Design and conduct IEC 
campaigns for citizens to 
encourage behavioural  shift 
in favour of  NMT. Potential 
target groups could be 
RWAs, NGOs working on 
the ground, civic platforms, 
citizen groups, etc.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Travel Demand 
Management 
Plan of CMP, 
2020  P: BMLTA/DULT, 
BBMP  
 
S: Service 
providers, NGOs  BBMP's own 
funds  a. No. of 
trainings/works
hops/activities 
conducted  2026  
T- 4: Transitioning towards  cleaner and greener vehicles; and improving vehicle efficiencies through increased access to finance, policy enablers, and 
incentives and promoting R&D . 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   194  
Goal/Target: 90% of cars and motorcycles, 75% of buses to be powered by cleaner fuels by 2050 . 
  T 
4.1 Offer incentives for EVs 
such as reduced parking fee 
and toll charges  and waiver 
on fitness certificates .  Technological 
measures of 
CMP, 2020  P: Transport 
Department  
 
S: BBMP  GoK funds, 
own funds of 
BBMP  a. No. of 
incentives 
offered for 
cleaner fuels  
b. Reduction in 
average TCO for  
EVs a. Increase in 
EV vehicle  
sales and 
registrations 
by vehicle  
type  
b. No. of EVs  
(cleaner fuel 
vehicles) out 
of total 
vehicles 
registered  in 
the city  
c. Reduction 
in the 
emission 
load of 
vehicular 
tailpipe 
emissions  a. 
Reduction 
in air 
pollution  
b. 
Reduction 
in monthly 
expenditur
e on fuel 
consumptio
n 2026  
  T 
4.2 Offer incentives for BSVI 
(Bharat Stage Emission 
Standards 6 ) vehicles, such 
as road/fuel tax and 
registration fee reductions 
and facilitate the scrapping 
of older vehicles . Voluntary 
Vehicle Fleet 
Modern isation 
Program me (V-
VMP)/Vehicle 
Scrappage 
Policy  P: Transport 
Department  
 
S:  BBMP  GoK funds  a. No. of 
incentives 
offered for BSVI 
vehicles  
b. No. of 
operational 
Registered  
Vehicle 
Scrapping 
Facilities 
(RVSFs) and 
Automated a. No. of 
BSVI 
vehicles 
registered 
out of total 
vehicles  
b. Reduction 
in the no. of 
total BSIV 
(and older) 
vehicles 
registered  
c. No. of a. 
Reduction 
in air 
pollution  2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   195  
Testing Stations 
(ATSs)  vehicles 
scrapped  
  T 
4.3 Implement an effective 
emission compliance  
system. Disincentivise 
higher -emitting vehicles by 
imposing Green Tax/Cess 
based on ‘polluter pays ’ 
principle . Pollution Under 
Control 
Certificates 
(PUCC)  P: Transport 
Department  
 
S: MoRTH  GoK funds  a. No. of 
disincentivis ing 
mechanisms 
imposed  
b. No. of 
vehicles in the 
city with valid 
PUCC  a. Reduction 
in the 
emission 
load of 
vehicular 
tailpipe 
emissions  a. 
Reduction 
in air 
pollution  2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   196  
  T 
4.4 Provide accessible EV 
charging infrastructure:  
(a) Develop common 
charging infrastructure 
standards across vehicle 
types  and manufacturers.  
(b) Develop city -specific 
guidelines for setting up EV 
charging infrastructure in 
buildings and public places .  
(c) Pilot EV chargers 
integrated with urban 
infrastructure such as 
streetlights . 
(d) Identify spaces (such as 
petrol pumps) for charging 
larger vehicles (buses, 
freight, etc.) . 
(e) Encourage and 
incentivise private 
participation in EV 
charging infrastructure 
development to enhance  
ease of doing business .  Karnataka 
Electric Vehicle 
and Energy 
Storage Policy , 
2017  
 
Handbook of EV 
Charging 
Infrastructure 
Implementation
, NITI Aayog 
(https://www.ni
ti.gov.in/sites/d
efault/files/202
1-
08/Handbookfo
rEVChargingInf
rastructureImpl
ementation0812
21.pdf)  P: a)  GoI 
b) BESCOM  
c) BESCOM  
d) BBMP  
e) GoK  
 
S: a) GoK  
b) BBMP  
c) BDA  
d) Private  players  
e) BESCOM  GoK funds, 
own funds of 
BESCOM, 
BBMP, 
NCAP grants   
a. Common 
charging 
infrastructure 
standards across 
vehicle types 
and OEMs  
b. City-specific 
charging 
infrastructure 
guidelines for 
buildings and 
public places  
c. No. of EV 
chargers in 
public spaces, 
integrated with 
urban 
infrastructure  
d. No. of EV 
charging yards 
(for larger 
vehicles)  
e. No. of private  
EV charging 
stations set  up a. Increase in 
the no. of 
total EV 
charging 
stations in 
the city  
b. Increase in 
the no. of 
EVs 
registered  a. 
Reduction 
in air 
pollution  
b. 
Reduction 
in monthly 
expenditur
e on fuel 
consumptio
n 2026  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   197  
  T 
4.5 Facilitate private players to 
conduct R&D on battery 
recycling, retrofitting of 
fossil fuel vehicles to enable 
them to use cleaner fuels, 
etc., by providing seed 
funds/subsidies, promoting 
ease of doing business, 
strengthening start -up 
ecosystems . Karnataka 
Electric Vehicle 
and Energy 
Storage Policy  – 
2017  P: Transport 
Department  
  GoK funds  a. No. of new 
R&D 
products/proces
ses/concepts 
developed 
around 
switching  from 
ICE to cleaner 
fuel vehicle  a. Increase in 
the no. of 
cleaner fuel 
vehicles in 
the city  a. 
Economic 
opportuniti
es 
b. 
Reduction 
in air 
pollution  
c. 
Reduction 
in monthly 
expenditur
e on fuel 
consumptio
n 2028  
  T 
4.6 Conduct a study to 
understand the feasibility 
of using hydrogen as a fuel 
in public transport (buses) . *National 
Hydrogen 
Mission  
*India's Lon g-
Term Low -
Carbon 
Development 
Strategy  
(MoEFCC)  P: BMTC, KSRTC  
 
S: DULT/BMLTA  Own funds of 
BMTC and 
KSRTC  a. Feasibility 
study on 
hydrogen buses 
in Bengaluru  a. Increase in 
the no. of 
hydrogen 
buses in the 
city a. 
Reduction 
in air 
pollution  2026  
  T 
4.7 Prepare a Clean Fuel 
Transition Plan  for 
Bengaluru with 2040 as the 
horizon year. This plan 
should be prepared for all 
modes , particularly  buses 
and IPT modes ( e.g., 
autorickshaws ).    P: BMTC, KSRTC, 
DULT/BMLTA  
 
S: GoK, Transport 
Department  Own funds of 
BMTC, 
KSRTC and 
DULT/BMLT
A; NCAP 
grants  a. Clean Fuel 
Transition Plan, 
2040 , for 
Bengaluru  a. Increase in 
the no. of 
cleaner fuel 
vehicles 
registered in 
all modes 
(esp ecially  
buses and 
IPT)  
b.Reduction a. Avoiding 
carbon 
lock -in 
b. 
Reduction 
in air 
pollution  
c. 
Reduction 
in monthly 2026  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   198  
in the no. of 
ICE vehicles  expenditur
e on fuel 
consumptio
n 
 
d. 
Improved 
resource 
efficiency  
  T 
4.8 Make access to finance 
easier through strategies  
such as:  
a) Providing low -income 
drivers and small 
businesses with easy loans 
to reduce up -front costs of 
EV; and  
b) Better communication of 
MUDRA loans . *FAME 2  
*Karnataka 
Electric Vehicle 
and Energy 
Storage  
(KEVES)  Policy -
2017  P: Financial 
institutions (e .g., 
banks)  
 
S: Transport 
Department  FAME 2, 
GoK (KEVES 
Policy), low-
interest loans 
by banks  a. No. of 
incentives for 
low-income 
drivers  a. Increase in 
the no. of EV 
registrations  a. 
Reduction 
in air 
pollution  
b. Financial 
support to 
low-income 
households  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   199  
  T 
4.9 Conduct IEC campaigns to 
sensit ise stakeholders 
regarding  cleaner fuel 
vehicles (benefits, 
infrastructure 
requirements, usage, fuel 
efficiency, battery recycl ing, 
etc.)  
(Stakeholder groups  
include  PT operators, 
potential EV buyers, 
charging infra structure  
developers, actor s involved 
in vehicle servicing , and 
maintenance.)  LiFE (Lifestyle 
For 
Environment) 
Mission  P: DULT/BMLTA, 
BBMP  
 
S: NGOs, citizen s’ 
groups  NCAP grants , 
own funds of 
BBMP  a. No. of 
trainings/sessio
ns/activities 
conducted  
b. No. of people 
reached through 
IEC campaigns  a. Increase in 
the 
registration 
of EVs  
b. Increase in 
public 
acceptance 
and 
awareness of 
cleaner fuel 
modes  a. 
Reduction 
in air 
pollution  
b. 
Reduction 
in monthly 
expenditur
e on fuel 
consumptio
n 2025  
  T 
4.10  Conduct training 
program mes targeted  for 
marginalised groups to 
facilitate a just transition 
(to avoid externalities of 
cleaner fuel penetration) . *Karnataka 
Electric Vehicle 
and Energy 
Storage Policy , 
2017  P: Commerce and 
Industries 
Department 
(GoK)  
 
S: BBMP, private  
players  GoK  a. No. of 
training 
sessions/skill -
building 
workshops, etc. 
conducted  
b. No. of women 
trained  
c. No. of low -
income 
community 
members 
trained  a. Avoid ing 
externalities 
of cleaner 
fuel 
penetration  
b. Increase in 
skilled 
workforce in 
the sector  a. New job 
opportuniti
es 
b. 
Economic 
upliftment 
of 
marginalise
d groups  2026  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   200  
  T 
4.11 Give preference to agencies 
with low -carbon fleet when 
contracting for 
government/municipal 
services , or mandatorily 
include this requirement in 
new tenders.    P: BBMP  
 
S: All government 
departments/age
ncies  Department s
’/agencies ’ 
own funds  a. No. of cleaner 
fuel vehicles 
used in 
providing 
municipal and 
government 
services  a. Increase in 
the total 
registration 
of cleaner 
fuel vehicles  a. 
Increased 
acceptance 
and 
awareness 
of cleaner 
fuel 
vehicles 
amongst 
citizens  
b. 
Reduction 
in air 
pollution  
c. Reduc ed 
monthly 
expenditur
e on fuel 
consumptio
n, more 
governmen
t funds 
available 
for other 
activities  Contract  
preferen
ce and 
inclusion 
in  
tenders  
from  
2025 (or  
after  
current 
lease 
expires)  
T- 5: Transitioning towards  cleaner and greener freight through policies, incentives , and fleet management . 
Goal/Target: 47% of total freight vehicles to be powered by cleaner fuels by 2050 . 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   201  
  T 
5.1 Offer incentives for electric 
freight such as parking fees 
reduction,  road tax 
exemptions, flexible 
timings, relaxations in 
approvals or rebates for 
EV-ready warehouse . City Logistics 
Plan (under 
preparation by 
DULT)  P: BBMP  
 
S: Transport 
Department, 
freight operators,  FAME 2, 
own funds of 
BBMP  a. No. of 
incentives 
provided for 
electric freight  
b. % of electric 
2W, 3W and 4W 
freight  
c. No. of 
warehouses with 
EV  
charging 
infrastructure  a. Reduction 
in the 
emission 
load of 
vehicular 
tailpipe 
emissions  a. 
Reduction 
in air 
pollution  
b. 
Reduction 
in monthly 
expenditur
e on fuel 
consumptio
n 2025  
  T 
5.2 Prepare a plan to convert 
the entire SWM fleet to 
EVs, guided by the pilot 
implementation activity 
taken up by DULT and 
BBMP in 2022  Pilot project 
conducted by 
DULT in 
collaboration 
with BBMP and 
Kinetic Green 
Energy and 
Power Solutions 
Ltd, to study the 
feasibility of EV s 
in solid waste 
collection  
(carried out in 2 
blocks  of Ward 
no. 119  for 3 
months ). P: BBMP, 
DULT/BMLTA  
 
S: EV 
manufacturers, 
charging 
infrastructure 
providers  BBMP's own 
funds, NCAP 
grants , 
DULT/BMLT
A's own 
funds  a. % of EV in the 
entire SWM 
fleet  2025  
  T 
5.3 Prepare a Clean Fuel 
Transition Plan  for 
freight vehicles in 
Bengaluru , with 2040 as 
the horizon year.  City Logistics 
Plan (under 
preparation by 
DULT)  P: BBMP, 
DULT/BMLTA  
 
S: GoK , Transport 
Department, 
freight operators, Own funds of 
BMTC and 
DULT/BMLT
A; NCAP 
grants ; GoK 
funds  a. Clean Fuel 
Transition Plan 
for Freight 
vehicles, 2040 , 
for Bengaluru  a. Increase in 
the no. of 
cleaner fuel 
freight 
vehicles 
registered  a. Avoiding 
carbon 
lock -in 
b. 
Reduction 
in air 2026  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   202  
charging 
infrastructure 
providers  b. Reduction 
in the no. of 
ICE freight 
vehicles  pollution  
c. 
Reduction 
in monthly 
expenditur
e on fuel 
consumptio
n 
d. 
Improved 
resource 
efficiency  
  T 
5.4 Allow only EV -powered 
Light Duty Vehicles ( LDVs ) 
in the city , and ensure 
stringent enforcement of 
regulations for  Heavy Duty 
Vehicles  (HDVs ). City Logistics 
Plan (under 
preparation by 
DULT)  P: Traffic Police  
 
S: BBMP, 
DULT/BMLTA, 
Transport 
Department  Own funds of 
Traffic Police  a. % of EV  LDVs 
inside the city 
compared with 
all LDVs  
b. No. of ICE - 
HDVs entering 
the city  a. Increase in 
the no. of EV 
LDVs 
registered  
b. Reduction 
in the no. 
ICE HDV 
registrations  a. 
Reduction 
in air 
pollution  
b. 
Reduction 
in 
congestion  2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   203  
  T 
5.5 Conduct a study on low -
carbon freight under the 
City Logistics Plan. This 
should include 
understanding of gaps 
(infrastructure, finance, 
data, regulatory , etc.) in 
efficient multi -modal 
integration in collaboration 
with all stakeholders 
concerned (e.g., freight 
operators, railways, e -
commerce companies, 
warehouse operators , and 
government agencies)  
 
 
 
 
 
  City Logistics 
Plan (under 
preparation by 
DULT)  P: DULT/BMLTA  
 
S: GoK , Transport 
Department, 
Railways 
Department, 
freight operators, 
charging 
infrastructure 
providers  DULT/BMLT
A's own 
funds; NCAP 
grants  a. 
Comprehensive 
study on low-
carbon freight 
aligned with the 
City Logistics 
Plan a. Reduction 
in the 
emission 
load of 
vehicular 
tailpipe 
emissions  
b. Optimised 
fleet 
movement 
and 
management 
of freight 
vehicles  a. 
Reduction 
in air 
pollution  
b. 
Reduction 
in 
congestion  
c. Resource 
efficiency  2026  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   204  
T-6: Ensuring a resilient urban transport system to avoid service disruptions and damage of transport infrastructure during extreme weather events , 
which impact people, nature , and the economy of the city . 
  T 
6.1 Mandate inclusion of 
climate non -negotiables  
in all transport sector 
projects, plans, policies , 
and value chain's scope. 
This should include:  
a) Climate  resilience 
guidelines/standards in 
transport infrastructure 
planning, design , and 
material consideration .  
b) Provisions for 
inclusiveness based on a ge, 
ability , and gender , and 
consultative bottom -up 
planning approaches , 
which result in higher 
adaptive  capacity .   P: DULT/BMLTA, 
all service 
operators, BBMP  
 
S: Transport 
Department, GoK  Own funds of 
all agencies  a. Inclusion of 
climate non-
negotiables in 
all transport 
plans, projects, 
policies, and 
value chain s a. Higher 
resilience of 
transport 
infrastructur
e and assets 
against  
climate/envir
onmental 
hazards  
b. Higher 
adaptive 
capacity of  
transport 
infrastructur
e and assets 
in the face of  
hazards 
affecting the 
transport 
sector  a. 
Reduction 
in 
casualties , 
loss of life , 
and 
damage to 
property 
caused by 
climate/env
ironmental 
hazards 
affecting 
the 
transport 
sector  2026  
  T 
6.2 Conduct a study to build 
quantitative evidence on 
degree of loss and damage 
to transport infrastructure 
and assets caused by 
climate -induced hazards .   P: DULT/BMLTA, 
BBMP  
 
S: All service 
operators  Own funds of 
DULT/BMLT
A and BBMP  a.Comprehensiv
e study on 
degree of loss 
and damage to 
transport 
infrastructure  
and assets due 
to climate -
induce d hazards  2026  
  T 
6.3 Mandate defensive driving 
training for new licen ces.   P: Transport 
Department  
 
S: BBMP  Own funds of 
Transport 
Department 
and BBMP  a. No. of 
trainings 
conducted  
b. No. of people 
trained  a.Reduction  
in accidents 
and fatalities  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   205  
  T 
6.4 Mandate third -party 
verification of all pothole 
repair activities as a part of 
standard quality control 
protocol .   P: DULT/BMLTA  
 
S: BBMP  BBMP's own 
funds 
(Funding 
source for 
road 
construction)  a. Appointment 
of a third -part y 
verifier  a. 
Improvemen
t in the 
quality of city 
road s 
b. Reduction 
in the no. of 
potholes  
c. Reduction 
in accidents 
and fatalities  2025  
  T 
6.5 Prepare a Road Network 
and Movement Plan , 
which ensures more than 
one type of connectivity for 
every location . Road Network 
Development 
Plan of CMP, 
2020  P: DULT/BMLTA  
  
S: BBMP  Own funds of 
DULT/BMLT
A  a. Road Network 
and Movement 
Plan  a. Improved 
connectivity 
for all 
locations  
b. Better 
access during 
disasters  2025  
  T 
6.6 Traffic management and 
hazard monitoring system s 
should speak to each other. 
Information dissemination  
during disasters  should be 
done  through the PIS 
platform.  Technological 
measures  of 
CMP, 2020  
 
KSNDMC ’s 
Hazard 
Monitoring 
system  P: KSNDMC  
 
S: BMLTA/DULT, 
all service 
operators, BBMP  GoK Funds  a. Hazard alerts 
and real -time 
updates on 
disasters  
provided to the 
public through 
the PIS system  a. Better 
disaster 
preparedness 
and response  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   206  
  T 
6.7 A single agency should be 
identified (ideally BBMP) 
as a nodal agency , 
responsible for the 
overarching  monitoring  of 
all climate -induced damage 
to the transport sector. 
Other stakeholders 
concerned (service 
operators, regulatory 
agencies, etc.) should 
coordinate with this nodal 
agency .   P: BBMP  
 
S: BMLTA/DULT, 
all service 
operators, BBMP, 
Traffic Police  Own funds of 
BBMP  a. Selection and 
appointment of 
a single 
monitoring 
agency  a. Better 
disaster 
preparedness
, response , 
and recovery  
b. Better 
accountabilit
y 2026  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   207  
5.3.3  Solid waste management   
Approach  
The s olid waste management approach for the BCAP is based  on an understanding of emission 
scenarios for solid waste, the current SWM performance of the city , and the challenges/gaps 
and opportunities that the sector holds , to reduce emissions and build resilience. Hence, the 
BCAP adopts an Integrated Solid Waste Management (ISWM) approach to ensure the 
diversion of waste, recycl ing and reuse of wet and dry waste, recovery of waste  by-products , 
and disaster -resilient infrastructure . Such an approach  ensures a holistic climatic lens of 
strong mitigative and adaptative measures , and disaster preparedness that adapts itself to a 
changing climate , to contribute to the  1.5°C target under  the Paris Agreement and to help 
create more resilient waste management infrastructure. Figure 64 summarises this  approach 
to ISWM.  
Figure 64: Approach for Integrated Solid Waste Management  
 
The action tracks and the actions listed below have been drafted considering the aspects of 
emission reduction and energy efficiency, climate resilience, improving human health, 
inclusion, social and gender equity, creation of green jobs, circular business models , etc., in 
this sector.  
Sectoral action tracks  
No. Action track  
SWM -1 Divert waste from landfill s by better  segregation of waste at source . 
SWM -2 Increase resource recovery and circular economy by promoting decentral ised waste 
management systems . 
SWM -3 Implement scientific landfills  with gas capture system s and suitably  repurpose closed 
landfills/dump sites .   
SWM -4 Create inclusive and hazard -resilient SWM infrastructure  and services . 
 
 
 
 
 Divert
Divert waste from 
landfills by 
better segregation 
of waste at sourceRecyle & Reuse 
Promote 
decentralised 
waste 
management, and 
ensure resource 
recovery and 
circular economy Recover
Ensure scientific 
management of 
landfills and bio 
remeditation of 
legacy wasteDisaster Resilience
Ensure disaster -
resilient waste 
infrastructure
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   208  
Track -wise actions  Priority  
S.No  Actions  Aligned 
with 
(ongoing 
initiatives/ot
her actions)  Responsible 
Agency  
Primary (P)  
Secondary (S)  Potential 
Source of 
funding  Output  Outcome  Co-benefit  Timeline  
(Targeted 
year of 
completion of 
action)  
SWM -1: Divert waste from landfill s by better  segregation of waste at source . 
Goal/Target: Achieve  100% segregation of waste by 2025 and achieve over 90% diversion of waste from landfills by 2050 (60% by 2030 & 75% by 2040) . 
  SWM -
1.1. Ensure complete 
implementation of ward 
micro -plan  in all wards  to 
manage and monitor 
waste in smaller 
units/blocks to facilitate 
segregation, increase 
accountability , and 
improve planning and 
governance.  BBMP 
SWM 
Manual, 
2017  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
 
S: BBMP -IT 
Department , 
Transport 
department  BBMP SWM 
Budget, 
Swach h 
Bharat 
Mission  –
Urban  a. Ward micro plan 
(includes block map, 
centralised/decentral
ised facilities, 
workers and vehicles 
allotted , and 
training ) 
b. Per day waste 
generation from each 
block.  a. 
Increased 
segregation 
in smaller 
units  a. Improved service 
delivery  
b. Increased 
accountability and 
transparency  
c. Improved living 
conditions for poor 
communities  
d. Improved 
planning and 
governance  
e. Reduced  GHG 
emissions  due to 
transport  
f. Increased job 
opportunities  2025  
  SWM
-1.2 Conduct IEC campaigns to 
nudge the social 
behaviour  of the citizens 
in favour of  segregation of 
waste as per the 3-bin 
system (wet, dry , and 
sanitary). A dditionally , 
create awareness on BBMP 
SWM 
Manual, 
BBMP Bye-
laws  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
  BBMP SWM 
Budget, 
Swa chh 
Bharat 
Mission  – 
IEC funds  a. No. of awareness 
campaigns 
conducted on 3-bin 
segregation, waste 
recovery , etc., in the 
city Increased 
3-bin 
segregation 
at source  Improved health, 
livelihood and well-
being  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   209  
climatic impacts and 
opportunities relating to  
waste recovery/reuse .  
  SWM
-1.3 Establish waste 
management cells in every 
ward as per  ward micro -
plan , to conduct regular 
inspections, address  
grievances, monitor 
performance, and 
strengthen coordination 
between link worker, bulk 
waste generators, 
pourakarmikas , waste 
processing service 
providers , etc. BBMP 
SWM 
Manual, 
BBMP Bye-
laws  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
  BBMP SWM 
Budget, 
Swachh 
Bharat  
Mission  – 
Urban  a. Waste 
management cells in 
each ward  
b. Total no. of 
inspections 
conducted per ward 
per annum  
c. Total no. of 
grievances 
received/addressed 
per month  
d. Status of 
addressing 
grievances  Detailed 
inspection 
reports for 
each ward , 
and 
performanc
e 
assessment 
for solid 
waste 
manageme
nt a. Improved service 
delivery  
b. Increased 
accountability and 
transparency  
c. Increased job 
opportunities  2025  
  SWM  
1.4 Ensure that every waste 
management cell 
establishes a command 
centre  for 100% GIS 
digital mapping of waste 
collection bins  and 
transport vehicles and 
ensure s continuous 
monitoring through a 
web-based platform.  BBMP 
SWM 
Manual, 
2017  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
 
S: BBMP -IT 
Department , 
Transport 
department  BBMP SWM 
Budget, 
Swachh 
Bharat  
Mission  – 
Urban  a. Integrated 
command centre  
b. Efficiency of 
collection  
c. Low -carbon waste 
collection vehicles  
d. Reduced waste 
collection trips and 
distance  a. 
Increased 
waste 
segregation 
and 
collection 
performanc
e.  
b. Reduced 
trips by 
waste 
collection 
vehicles  a. Improved service 
delivery  
b. Increased 
accountability and 
transparency  
c. Increased job 
opportunities  
d. Reduced  GHG 
emissions from  
transportation  2025  
  SWM  
1.5 Ensure every ward has 
sufficient auto tippers and 
street sweeping machines 
to reduce travel distance  
and trips to collect waste. 
Convert solid waste fleet BBMP 
SWM 
Manual, 
2017  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
 
S: BBMP -IT 
department, 
Transport BBMP SWM 
Budget, 
Swachh 
Bharat  
Mission  –
Urban  2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   210  
to low-emission vehicles 
for reduced emissions .   Department , 
DULT  
  SWM   
1.6 Ensure C&D waste 
removal from public 
places where C&D 
projects are required to 
submit waste 
management plan 
(including details of 
recycling methods  and use 
of mechanical sweeping 
machines to remove road 
dust/silt/debris caused 
due to 
construction/demolition 
activities) for better  waste 
management, improved 
air quality , and well -
being.  BBMP 
SWM 
Manual, 
2017  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
  BBMP SWM 
Budget, 
Swachh 
Bharat  
Mission  –
Urban  a. Project -level C&D 
waste management 
plan  
b. Efficiency of 
collection of C&D 
waste  C&D waste 
removal  a. Improved service 
delivery  
b. Reduced 
emissions  
c. Improved public 
health  
d. Reduced air 
pollution  2025  
  SWM   
1.7 Create an open access 
platform and ensure every 
waste management cell 
upload s solid waste 
information in each ward 
at regular (quarterly) 
intervals , to ensure 
accountability and 
transparency.  BBMP road 
map  P: BBMP -
BSWML  BBMP SWM 
Budget, 
Swachh 
Bharat  
Mission  – 
Urban  a. Open access 
platform with ward -
level solid waste 
generation data  
b. Efficiency in 
collection of SWM 
related  
c. Efficiency in 
redressal of customer 
complaints  
d. Quarterly waste 
performance reports.   Increased 
access to 
solid waste  
data  a. Increased 
accountability and 
transparency  
b. Improved service 
delivery  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   211  
  SWM   
1.8 Create standard operating 
procedures 
(SOP s)/guidelines , and 
conduct regular 
(quarterly/half -yearly) 
trainings and workshops 
for pourakarmikas  to 
ensure effective 
segregati on of waste at 
sources (such as 
household, commercial, 
open spaces, streets, and 
public/religious spaces) .   P: BBMP -
BSWML  
  BBMP SWM 
Budget, 
Swachh 
Bharat  
Mission  – 
Urban  a. SOP for waste 
segregation  
b. No. of 
workshops/awarenes
s campaigns 
conducted  
c. Extent of 
segregation  
d. Efficiency of 
collection  a. 
Increased 
segregation
, segregated 
collection , 
and 
transport to 
transfer 
stations  
b. 
Improved 
standard of 
living  a. Increased 
accountability and 
transparency  
b. Improved service 
delivery  
c. Social equity  2025  
  SWM  
1.9 Create dignity of labour 
for pourakarmikas . 
Introduce legal status and 
a licensing mechanism for 
ragpickers and waste 
workers to formalise them 
and provide support to 
ensure social equity, 
informal inclusion, and 
job security.     P: BBMP -
BSWML  
  BBMP SWM 
Budget, 
Swachh 
Bharat  
Mission  – 
Urban  a. Recognition for 
pourakarmikas .  
b. List of formalised 
rag pickers  
   a. 
Increased 
segregatio n
, segregated 
collection , 
and 
transport to 
the transfer 
stations  a. Increased 
accountability and 
transparency  
b. Improved service 
delivery  
c. Social equity  
d. Inclusion of 
informal workers  
e. Job security   
f. Gender equity  2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   212  
  SWM  
1.10 Develop and maintain 
mustering centres in every 
ward (preferable at the 
transfer stations) across 
the city ( including 
necessary facilities such as 
proper toilets, water, 
soap, or sanitiser) for 
pourakarmikas and rag 
pickers , to ensure better 
working conditions and 
improved public health.  BBMP 
SWM 
Manual, 
BBMP Bye-
laws  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
  BBMP SWM 
Budget, 
Swachh 
Bharat  
Mission  – 
Urban  a. Total no. of 
mustering centres  in 
every ward  
b. Improved working 
conditions  
c. Extent of 
segregation  
d. Efficiency of 
collection  b. 
Improved 
standard of 
living  a. Improved public 
health, livelihood , 
and well-being . 
b. Gender and 
social equity  
c. Job creation  2030  
  SWM  
1.11 With the support  of self-
help  groups, conduct IEC 
campaigns and training 
sessions for women in 
slums/vulnerable 
communities/poor 
pockets to nudge social 
behaviour in relation to  
segregation and 
recycling/reusing waste , 
to improve waste 
segregation and create 
livelihood s.  BBMP 
SWM 
Manual, 
BBMP Bye-
laws , road 
map  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
 
S: BBMP, 
Slum 
development 
board.  BBMP SWM 
Budget, 
Swachh 
Bharat  
Mission  – 
IEC funds  a. Total no. of 
awareness drives 
conducted in each 
slum  
b. Total amount of 
dry waste recycled 
per ward  
c. Total no. of women 
involved in recycling 
waste  a. 
Increased 
segregation 
and 
awareness 
b. Volume 
of recycled 
materials 
per ward  a. Improved service 
delivery  
b. Increased job 
opportunities  
c. Improved 
livelihood, well -
being , and health  
e. Inclusion of 
informal workers  
f. Social equity  
g. Accountability  
h. Gender equity  2030  
  SWM   
1.12 Effectively implement the 
mandate of bulk waste 
generators to segregate 
and manage waste at 
source, identify  non-
compliance through 
inspection , and  strictly 
implement penalt ies 
under the  ‘polluter pay s’ BBMP 
SWM 
Manual, 
BBMP Bye-
laws , road 
map  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
  BBMP SWM 
Budget, 
Swachh 
Bharat  
Mission  – 
Urban  a. Total 
number/volume of 
bulk waste processed 
through 
centralised/empanell
ed service providers 
processing facilities  
b. Total amount of 
penalt ies collected Increased 
segregation 
of waste 
and 
performanc
e of bulk 
waste 
generators.  a. Increased 
accountability and 
transparency  
b. Improved service 
delivery  
c. Improved 
planning and 
governance  
d. Job creation  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   213  
principle to establish 
improved performance 
and service delivery.  from bulk waste 
generators  
c. Total no. of 
inspections on bulk 
waste generators per 
ward (quarterly/half 
yearly)  
d. Volume of bulk 
waste generation in 
each ward  
e. Updated database 
of vendors (in the 
portal for the Bulk 
Generator Network 
Service and Vendor 
Empanelment, under 
the K asa Vilavaari 
Sevadararu 
programme ) 
  SWM   
1.13 Conduct quarterly/half -
yearly workshops on 
SWM  to promote  global 
best practices in ward -
level waste management 
cells and ensure 
participation and 
coordination of bulk waste 
generators, empanelled 
service providers, other 
vendors, NGOs, RWAs, 
self-help  groups , etc., to 
create social cohesion.  Swach h 
Survekshan  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
  BBMP SWM 
Budget, 
Swachh 
Bharat  
Mission  – 
Urban  a. Total no. of 
workshops 
conducted in each 
ward   Day to day 
updated 
SWM best 
practices 
across the 
globe.  a. Improved service 
delivery  
b. Increased social 
cohesion  
c. Increased job 
opportunities  
d. Improved 
technological 
advancement  2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   214  
  SWM  
1.14 Upgrade centralised wet 
waste processing units to 
fully functional capacity 
with optimal  operational 
performance. Ensure  that 
compost plants are fed 
only source -segregated 
organic waste to make 
sure heavy metals in the 
compost are within the 
limit , to get the maximum 
compost from processing.  BBMP 
SWM 
Manual, 
BBMP Bye-
laws , Road 
map  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
  BBMP SWM 
Budget, 
Swachh 
Bharat  
Mission  – 
Urban  a. Total amount of 
waste processed in 
central ised wet waste 
processing units.  Increased 
central ised 
wet waste 
processing  a. Increased 
technological 
advancement  
b. Improved service 
delivery  
c. Reduced 
emissions  2030  
 SWM  
1.15 Ensure accurate ward -
wise mapping of locations 
of open burning of waste,  
intensify surveillance , and  
impos e fines on 
defaulters.  Action 
aligned 
with air 
quality 
action -AQ 
5.3 and 
NCAP  
b. Swachh 
Vayu 
Sarvekshan  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
 
S: KSPCB  NCAP funds  a. % reduction in 
harmful and toxic gas 
emissions from waste  
b. % reduction in 
sites for open 
burning of waste  
c. Creation of litter -
free ambassadors for 
each ward  a. 
Improve d 
local health 
resilience  
b. 
Prevention 
of exposure 
to 
unwanted 
odour s  a. Achieve ment of  
Swachh  Bharat 
Abhiyan goals  2025  
SWM  2: Increase resource recovery and circular economy by promoting decentral ised waste management systems . 
Goal/Target: Recycling of paper & plastic waste to be >60% by 2030, >75% by 2040 & >90% by 2050.   
  SWM  
2.1 Conduct IEC campaigns in 
collaboration with NGOs 
to nudge social behaviour , 
and conduct survey to 
promote decentral ised 
composting and recycling 
materials in residential 
communities , mandi s, 
public and religious 
gathering s, parks and Swach h 
Survekshan
, Namma 
Kaasa 
Namma 
Javabdhari  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
  BBMP SWM 
Budget, 
Swachh 
Bharat  
Mission  – 
Urban  a. Total no. of IEC 
campaigns 
conducted in every 
ward  Increased 
community 
engagemen
t a. Increased 
accountability  
b. Social equity and 
inclusivity  2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   215  
gardens , through citizen 
participation to promote  
resource recovery and 
reduce waste disposal , 
and to ensure 
accountability and green 
initiatives.   
  SWM  
2.2 Implement decentralised 
processing units in each 
ward (contingent on land 
and resource availability) , 
and support 
communities/citizens to 
implement decentralised 
units and utilise  compost 
within the premises as 
fertil iser, to increase in 
situ processing of waste, 
resource recovery , and 
reduced emissions.  BBMP 
SWM 
Manual, 
BBMP Bye-
laws , 
Namma 
Kaasa 
Namma 
Javabdhari  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
  BBMP SWM 
Budget, 
Swachh 
Bharat  
Mission  – 
Urban  a. Total amount of 
wet waste processed 
in situ  in each ward  
b. Extent of solid 
waste recovered  Increased 
decentral is
ed wet 
waste 
processing  a. Increased 
accountability  
b. Reduced 
emissions from 
waste  
c. Improved public 
health  
d. Social inclusivity 
and equity  
e. Creation of g reen 
jobs  
f. Inclusion of 
informal workers  2030  
  SWM  
2.3 Collaborate with food 
processing 
units/restaurants/delivery 
service units through 
empanelled service 
providers to take up 
initiatives and incentiv ise 
food waste reduction. 
Increase access to goods 
without plastic packaging 
by incentivising sellers.    P: BBMP -
BSWML  
  BBMP SWM 
Budget, 
Swachh 
Bharat  
Mission  – 
Urban  a. Initiatives and 
incentives for food 
waste reduction b. 
Total amount of food 
and plastic usage per 
unit 
c. Extent of solid 
waste recovered  Volume of 
reduced 
food 
wastage  2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   216  
  SWM  
2.4 Increase dry waste 
collection centres and 
aggregators in all wards , 
and set up material 
recovery facilities (MRF) 
and facilities for 
producing refuse -derived 
fuel (RDF) . BBMP 
SWM 
Manual, 
BBMP Bye-
laws , road 
map  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
  BBMP SWM 
Budget, 
Swachh 
Bharat  
Mission  – 
Urban  c. Total no. of MRF 
facilities  
d. Total amount of 
RDF  Increased 
organ ised 
dry waste 
facilities  2030  
  SWM   
2.5 Introduce a waste 
recovery platform (if 
possible , in the SWM cell 
in each ward) and 
increase visibility/market 
for businesses that sell 
recycled materials . 
Collaborate with waste 
management service 
providers , NGOs , etc., to 
buy/sell waste by-
products . Conduct ‘waste 
purchase ’ drives to 
encourage citizens to 
judiciously segregate and 
sell the household waste 
that could be recycled , to 
create opportunities for 
green business es and 
ensure  resource recovery.  Solid Waste 
Manageme
nt Rules , 
2016  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
  BBMP SWM 
Budget, 
Swachh 
Bharat  
Mission  – 
Urban  a. Total no. of waste 
recovery platforms  
b. Total number/type 
of green business in 
the city  
c. Total amount of 
recycled materials 
created from dry 
waste  Increased 
resource 
recovery  a. Sustainable 
finance  
b. Social inclusion  
c. Gender equity  2030  
  SWM   
2.6 Work with local materials 
collectors to recruit or 
retain recycling 
manufacturers. Build 
partnerships to analyse  
and develop a market for a Solid Waste 
Manageme
nt Rules, 
2016  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
 
S: KSPCB, 
MSME 
Development BBMP SWM 
Budget, 
Swachh 
Bharat  
Mission  – a. Total number of 
recycling 
manufacturers  
b. Market for plastic 
waste recycling   Volume of 
recyclable 
textile 
waste  a. Sustainable 
finance  
b. Economic growth  
c. Social inclusion    
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   217  
recycled textiles industry  
(including meeting with 
stakeholders to determine 
and overcome barriers, 
developing standards and 
specifications, and 
committing public 
purchasing contracts to 
promote the industry.) 
Focus on materials with 
persistently low recycling 
rates.  Institute , 
Industries 
Department  Urban, 
MSME funds  
  SWM  
2.7 Ensure that all 
public/private demolition 
projects  follow  C&D 
waste  recycling/recovery 
practices.  C&D Waste 
Manageme
nt Rules, 
2016  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
  BBMP SWM 
Budget, 
Swachh 
Bharat  
Mission  – 
Urban  a. Total C&D waste 
recycling projects  C&D waste 
recovery  a. Increased 
accountability  
b. Reduced 
emissions  2030  
  SWM  
2.8 Replace all plastic 
packages with 
recyclable/recycled 
materials to reduce use of 
non-recyclables. Strictly 
ban the sale and use of 
single -use PVC items and 
flex banners , and replace 
with recyclable PE eco -
flex.  Solid Waste 
Manageme
nt Rules, 
2016  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
 
S: KSPCB, 
MSME 
Development 
Institute , 
Industries 
Department  BBMP SWM 
budget , 
Swachh 
Bharat  
Mission  – 
Urban, 
MSME funds  a. Total amount of 
recyclable/recycled 
waste packaging in 
the city  
b. Ban on  single -use 
PVC items  Recycled 
material 
packaging 
and 
banners  Reduced emission s  2030  
  SWM  
2.9 All manufacturers of non -
recyclable materials must 
be mandated to pay high 
penalt ies under the  
‘polluter pay s’ principle , 
or take up carbon -neutral Solid Waste 
Manageme
nt Rules, 
2016  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
 
S: KSPCB, 
MSME 
Development BBMP SWM 
budget , 
Swachh 
Bharat  
Mission  – a. Total number  of 
trees planted/other 
carbon -neutral 
measures taken up 
by manufacturers . Implement
ation of 
‘polluter 
pays’ 
principle  a. Increased 
accountability  
b. Reduced 
emissions  2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   218  
measures to increase 
carbon sequestration and 
create a path to shift 
towards recycled 
material s. Institute , 
Industries 
Department  Urban, 
MSME funds  b. Total amount of 
penalty paid by non -
recyclable material 
manufacturers.   
  SWM  
2.10  Prepare a comprehensive 
plan and reporting 
framework for extended 
producer s. This includes 
revised E xtended 
Producer Responsibility 
(EPR) norms (Central) by 
empowering formal and 
informal waste pickers, 
Producers ( PIBOs ) 
participation  in DWCCs to 
manage and plan the 
destination of non-
recyclable  waste in 
collaboration with 
informal workers.  EPR 
guidelines  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
 
S: KSPCB  BBMP SWM 
Budget, 
Swachh 
Bharat  
Mission  – 
Urban, 
KSPCB, GoK  a. City level plan and 
reporting framework  Number of 
green jobs 
and 
materials 
produced  a. Inclusion of 
informal workers  
b. Creation of g reen 
jobs  
c. Sustainable 
finance  2030  
  SWM  
2.11 Set up strict norms for 
new packaging and ensure 
that it is certified on the 
parameter of Life Cycle 
Assessment. Adopt an 
ordinance that restricts 
the use of expanded -
polystyrene containers at 
restaurants and other 
establishments. 
Implement a green 
business progr amme that Solid Waste 
Manageme
nt Rules , 
2016  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
  BBMP SWM 
budget  a. Life cycle 
assessment report  
b. Ordinance 
restricting 
polystyrene 
containers  Opportuniti
es for green 
business  a. Sustainable 
finance  
b. Creation of g reen 
jobs  
c. Reduction of 
emissions  2035  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   219  
rewards local business es 
for sustainability 
measures.  
  SWM  
2.12  Mandate SEZs  and 
industries to provide at 
least  5% of the total plot 
area for recycling facilities  
(they  can be incentivised 
for promoting recycled 
materials , or they can 
have RDF plants and use 
the fuel  produced in 
them) . Establish technical 
standards and guidelines 
for waste activities and 
develop a permit system 
for industries  concerned . Karnataka 
State Policy 
for Special 
Economic 
Zones , 
2009  P: GoK  
 
S: BBMP  Industries 
Department  a. Incentives  for 
SEZs and industries 
for recycling 
facilities.  
b. Standards to 
manage waste in 
industries.  Reuse of 
recycled 
materials 
within the 
SEZs to 
promote 
circular 
economy  a. Sustainable 
finance  
b. Green jobs   
c. Reduction of 
emissions  
d. Increased 
accountability  2030  
  SWM   
2.13  Identify bulk consumers , 
and inventorise e -waste, 
conduct monthly e -waste 
collection drives . E-Waste 
Manageme
nt Rules  P: KSPCB  
 
S: BBMP  GoK  a. List of bulk e -
waste consumers  
b. List of  monthly e -
waste collection 
drives  
c. Total no. of e -
waste collection 
centres  Volume of 
e-waste 
generated  a. Improved service 
delivery  
b. Inclusion of 
informal workers  2030  
  SWM  
2.14  Re-evaluate  the feasibility  
of waste -to-energy plants 
and of proposals in 
pipeline , for their  
operational and economic 
efficiency.  BBMP ’s on-
going 
initiatives  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
  BBMP ’s own 
fund s    
a. Reduced cost  
b. Reduced energy 
consumption  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   220  
  SWM   
2.15 Develop a study to 
highlight the importance 
of including  plastic 
recycling in the MSME 
policy.  MSME 
Policy 2022  P: MSME, GoI  
 
S: BBMP  MSME 
funding  a. A 
guideline/provision 
on bridging the gap 
between  MSME 
policy and green 
entrepreneurship  New 
business 
opportuniti
es in plastic 
recycling  a. Sustainable 
finance  
b. Economic growth  2035  
SWM -3: Implement scientific landfills  with gas capture system s and suitably  repurpose closed landfills/dump sites .   
Goal/Target: Achieve about 25% gas capture from scientific landfill by 2030, 50% by 2040 & 75% by 2050.   
  SWM   
3.1 Conduct land suitability 
analysis and develop a 
scientific landfill with gas 
capture system.  Solid Waste 
Manageme
nt Rules , 
2016  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
  BBMP SWM 
budget  a. Extent of scientific 
disposal of solid 
waste  
b. Amount of gas 
capture  Scientific 
facility for 
mixed 
waste  a. Reduction of 
emissions  
b. Reduced soil and 
air pollution  
c. Reduced water 
contamination  
d. Increased 
accountability  
e. Improved public 
health  2025  
  SWM   
3.2 Collaborate with gas 
companies to establish 
scientific landfill 
implementation and 
create sustainable 
financ ial incentive s by 
providing landfill gas 
utilisation . (Gas capture in 
cylinders , as with  LPG , 
can be considered .)   P: BBMP -
BSWML  
 
S: Gas 
agencies  BBMP SWM 
budget , gas 
agencies 
(PPP funds)  a. Amount of gas 
recovered from 
landfill  
b. Amount of gas 
supplied as LPG  
c. Extent of cost 
recovery  Circular 
economy  a. Reduced 
emissions  
b. Social inclusion  
c. Increased 
accountability  
d. Sustainable 
finance  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   221  
  SWM   
3.3 Create an action plan for 
managing legacy waste by 
adopting techniques such 
as windrows  and 
biomining (do 
pre/feasibility 
assessment) . Solid Waste 
Manageme
nt Rules , 
2016  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
  BBMP SWM 
budget  a. Amount of legacy 
waste  bioremediation  
b. Amount of green 
cover increase  Increased 
green 
spaces  a. Reduction of 
emissions  
b. Reduced soil and 
air pollution  
c. Reduced water 
contamination  
d. Sustainable 
finance  
e. Green business  2030  
  SWM    
3.4 Ensure the closed landfills 
are turned into green 
spaces.  Solid Waste 
Manageme
nt Rules , 
2016  P: BBMP -
BSWML  
  BBMP SWM 
budget  
SWM   -4: Create inclusive and hazard -resilient SWM infrastructure  and services .  
  SWM    
4.1 Prepare a plan  and 
coordinate and 
collaborate with various  
stakeholders to tackle 
disaster waste as a 
disaster response action 
and to raise  awareness 
about  sustainable, 
environmentally friendly 
and culturally supportive 
techniques for disaster 
waste management. 
Allocate separate funds 
for climate and disaster -
related purposes such as 
landfill fires.    P: BBMP -
Disaster 
Management 
Cell 
  
  
  
  
  BBMP 
disaster 
funds  a. Disaster response 
action plan  
b. Funds for waste 
department to tackle 
disasters  
c. Total amount of 
waste 
generated/collected 
due to disaster  Reduced 
post -
disaster 
waste 
accumulati
on a. Increased 
resilience to 
climatic hazards  
b. Reduction of 
emissions  
c. Reduced soil and 
air pollution  
d. Reduced water 
contamination  
e. Job creation  
f. Improved health 
and livelihood  2035  
  SWM   
4.2 Build  capacity for disaster 
waste management by 
providing educat ion and  
training on disaster 
prevention and response   P: BBMP -
Disaster 
Management 
Cell 
  BBMP 
disaster 
funds  a. Training modules,  
b. Dedicated staff  
c. List of vulnerable 
communities 
exposed to the Reduced 
post -
disaster 
waste a. Increased 
resilience to 
climatic hazards  
b. Reduction of 
emissions  2035  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   222  
to vulnerable 
communities, in 
collaboration with relief 
agencies.    
  
  
  externalities of post -
disaster waste effects  accumulati
on c. Reduced soil and 
air pollution  
d. Reduced water 
contamination  
e. Job creation  
f. Improved health 
and livelihood  
  SWM   
4.3 Ensure effective citizen 
grievance redressal 
through the Swachh app.   P: BBMP -
Disaster 
Management 
Cell 
  
  
  
  
  BBMP 
disaster 
funds  Efficiency in 
redressal of customer  
complaints  Reduced 
post 
disaster 
waste 
accumulati
on a. Resilience to 
climatic hazards  
b. Reduction of 
emissions  
c. Reduced soil and 
air pollution  
d. Reduced water 
contamination  
e. Job creation  
f. Improved health 
and livelihood  2035  
  SWM   
4.4 Focus on identification of 
existing capacities of post 
disaster waste 
management with special 
emphasis on Construction 
and Demolition (C&D) 
waste at every ward/zone 
of the city.    a. Amount of C&D 
waste due to disaster  
  SWM   
4.5 During monsoons, 
continuously  monitor 
stormwater drains and 
remove w aste dump s to 
ensure stormwater runoff 
and avoid floods.    a. Type/location of 
drains exposed to 
solid waste dump ing 
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   223  
5.3.4  Air quality    
Approach  
Based on an assessment of the gaps and barriers in the air quality sector, BCAP has identified 
a four -pronged approach with aligned actions for reducing both ambient as well as indoor air 
pollution and building resilience in the city. The approach aims at preventing, mitigating, and 
building resilience in citizens health and capacity building through monitoring, data 
management , and developing IECs.   Figure 65 illustrates the approach.  
Figure 65: Approach for improving  air quality  
 
Sectoral action tracks  
No. Action track  
AQ-1 Prevent air pollution at source through comprehensive strategies across sectors 
informed by evidence . 
AQ-2 Reduce/maintain ambient air pollution levels to prescribed standards and minim ise air 
pollution impacts through suitable local planning, urban design, and greening efforts . 
AQ-3 Ensure implementation of WHO indoor air quality standards and guidelines in all public 
buildings by 2030 and all other buildings by 2040 . 
AQ-4 Develop a city -level comprehensive health action plan for tackling health risks posed by 
short - and long -term exposure s to air pollution.  
AQ-5 Create/improve infrastructure and capacities to develop a robust evidence -based and 
result -oriented AQ management paradigm through monitoring, evaluation, feedback 
loop, and knowledge creation and dissemination to encourage behavioural  shifts . Prevent
Stringent regulations 
and operating 
protocols for 
vehicles carrying 
construction debris Mitigate
Ensure timely 
implementation of 
the proposed NCAP 
-micro action plan Resilience
Organize annual 
free health check -
ups at ward and city 
levelsCapacity Building
Achieve 
uninterrupted data 
collection from 
ambient air quality 
monitoring systems
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   224  
Track -wise actions  Priority  
S.No  Actions  Aligned 
with 
(ongoing 
initiatives/  
other 
actions)  Responsible 
Agency  
Primary (P)  
Secondary (S)  Potential 
Source of 
funding  Output  Outcome  Co-benefit  Timeline  
(Targeted 
year of 
completion 
of action)  
AQ- 1: Prevent air pollution at source through comprehensive strategies across sectors , informed by evidence . 
Goal/Target:  To achieve 40% reduction in PM10 concentration and 30% reduction in PM2.5 concentration by 2026 from 2017 -18 levels as per revised 
targets prescribed by NCAP . 
  AQ 
1.1. Ensure universal access and 
adoption of clean cooking 
fuel as primary fuel in the 
city through Pradhan Mantri 
Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY) and 
other similar 
program mes/schemes.  a. Pradhan 
Mantri 
Ujjwala 
Yojana  P: Energy 
Departmen t- 
GoK  
 
S: Food and 
Civil Supplies 
Departmen t PMUY 
financial 
assistance  a. % increase  in 
LPG/PNG as 
primary fuel  
b. % reduction in 
solid fuels  a. Reduction in 
indoor air 
pollution and 
health risks  a. Improve d 
residents’  
lifestyle  
b. 
Empower m
ent women  2030  
  AQ 
1.2 Incentiv ise voluntary fleet 
modern isation adhering to 
improved emission 
standards and facilitate 
scrapping of old vehicles in  
line with the old -vehicle 
scrappage programme  while 
encouraging a circular 
economy market around old 
vehicle scrappage.   a. Voluntary 
Vehicle Fleet 
Modernisatio
n Program 
(VVMP)  P: Transport 
Department  
 
S: RTO  State 
government 
concession 
on motor 
vehicle tax  a. % increase in 
the modern 
vehicular fleet  
b. % reduction in 
tailpipe emissions  Reduction in 
air pollution  Reduction 
in GHG 
emissions  2035  
  AQ 
1.3 Enforce stringent 
regulations and operating 
protocols for vehicles 
carrying construction debris 
(such as  the use of 
appropriate cover,  and 
avoid ing overload)  a. BBMP 
Building 
Bye-Laws - 
Guidelines 
for 
Construction 
and P: BBMP  a. GoK 
budget  
b. NCAP 
funds (9th 
Finance  
commission
) % reduction in re -
suspension of 
road dust - PM2.5 
and PM10  Improved 
ambient air 
quality  Improveme
nt in 
pedestrian 
health  2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   225  
Demolition 
Waste 
Management  
  AQ 
1.4 Mandate annual training for 
city officials and engineers 
on the concept and ideation 
of NCAP using the Clean Air 
Action Plan (Planning and 
Implementation) manual 
developed by the Climate 
Centre for Cities, NIUA.  NCAP  P: BBMP  
 
S: All agencies  a. GoK 
Budget  
b. NCAP 
funds (IX 
Finance)  a. Number of 
trainings  
b. Number of 
participating staff 
and departments    a. Improve 
multi -
stakeholder 
coordination  
b. Achieve  
attainment city 
status under 
NCAP     2025  
  AQ 
1.5 Mandate usage of gas -
fuelled  backup electricity 
generators and retrofit 
existing diesel/fossil fuel 
generators into gas 
generators  a. NCAP  
b. Swachh 
Vayu 
Sarvekshan  P: KSPCB  
 
S: BBMP  a. GoK 
budget  
b. NCAP 
funds (IX 
Finance)  a. % reduction in 
diesel  generators  
b. % of retrofits in 
the city  a. Improved 
ambient air 
quality  a. Improved 
building 
occupancy 
comfort  
b. 
Reduction 
in GHG 
emissions  2030  
  AQ 
1.6 Conduct mandatory annual 
mapping of the city's 
polluting activities in the 
city to priorit ise targeted 
sector -specific air pollution 
mitigation measures.  a. NCAP  
b. Swachh 
Vayu 
Sarvekshan  P: BBMP, 
KSPCB  
 
S: All agencies  a. NCAP 
funds (IX 
Finance)  a. Identification 
micro -level hot 
spots  
b. % improvement 
in data collection 
and dissemination  a. Improved 
ambient air 
quality  
b. Assured 
improvement 
of public 
health  
c. Mapping of 
most 
vulnerable 
people and 
zones  Improveme
nt in 
vulnerable 
people's 
health  2025  
  AQ 
1.7 Encourage promotional 
activities for the adoption of 
electric/induction cooking a. Go Electric 
Campaign  P: BEE  
 
S: KREDL  a. GoK 
funds  a. % increase in 
the number of 
users of electric a. 
Improve ment 
in residents’  a. Better 
indoor air 
quality  2027  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   226  
stoves by providing financial 
incentives to sellers   cooking  stoves  
b. % reduction us e 
of fossil fuel for 
cooking  lifestyle  
b. Improve d 
health 
resilience  of 
residents  
  AQ 
1.8 Develop low-emission zone 
(LEZ), ultra -low emission 
zone (ULEZ), or zero -
emission areas in the 
identified hotspots and 
restrict vehicle movement to 
limit tailpipe emissions , 
especially by heavy vehicles.  a. NCAP  
b. Swachh 
Vayu 
Sarvekshan  P: BBMP  
 
S: KSPCB, BTP  a. NCAP 
funds (IX 
Finance)  a. Number of 
reductions in hot 
spot s  
b. % reduction in 
ambient air 
pollutant 
concentrations  a. Improved 
ambient air 
quality  
b. Improve d 
public health  
c. Mapping of 
most 
vulnerable 
people and 
zones    2030  
  AQ 
1.9 Reduce transport sector 
emissions by promoting the 
use of Public Transport and 
Non -Motor ised Transport.  Transport 
sector action 
track no. 3  P: BBMP  
 
S: Transport 
Department , 
BMRCL, BMTC  a. GoK 
funds  a. % increase in 
usage of public 
transport  
b. % reduction in 
ambient air 
pollutant 
concentration 
levels  a. Improved 
ambient air 
quality  
b. Improve d 
public health    2025  
AQ-2: Reduce/maintain ambient air pollution levels to prescribed standards and minimi se air pollution impacts through suitable local planning, urban 
design, and greening efforts . 
Goal/Target:  To achieve 40% reduction in PM10 concentration and 30% reduction in PM2.5 concentration by 2026 from 2017 -18 levels as per revised 
targets prescribed by NCAP . 
  AQ 
2.1 Ensure timely 
implementation of the 
proposed micro action plan 
for BBMP jurisdiction under  
the 15th Finance 
Commission grant by 
creating adequate capacity a. NCAP  
b. Swachh 
Vayu 
Sarvekshan  P: BBMP  
 
S: All allocated 
agencies  a. NCAP 
funds (IX 
Finance)  a. % 
implementation 
and progress of 
micro action plans  
b. % reduction in 
ambient air 
pollution levels  a. Improved 
ambient air 
quality  
b. Progress in 
NCAP goals  a. Better 
public 
health  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   227  
partnerships and 
institutional coordination .  
  AQ 
2.2 Enforce mandatory 
installation of water 
sprinklers/spray, shielding, 
netting, covers/hoarding for 
aggregate and sand storage 
to minim ise dust pollution 
caused by construction or 
demolition works , and 
installation of a wash bay for 
cleaning  vehicles before they 
leave the site. All wash bays 
must have silt traps and use 
recycled water.  a. NCAP  
b. Swachh 
Vayu 
Sarvekshan  
c. BBMP 
Building 
Bye-Laws - 
Guidelines 
for 
Construction 
and 
Demolition 
Waste 
Management  P: BBMP  
 
S: KSPCB  a. NCAP 
funds (IX 
Finance)  % reduction in re -
suspension of 
road dust - PM2.5 
and PM10  a. Improved 
ambient air 
quality  
b. 
Improvement 
in residents’ 
health    2030  
  AQ 
2.3 Improve existing ITS 
systems to adopt advanced 
technology including AI to 
better synchron ise traffic 
flows and to reduce idling 
time of vehicles , which  
contribut es to air pollution . a. Transport 
sector action 
track 2  P: Transport 
Department  
 
S: BTP  a. GoK 
funds  a. % reduction in 
traffic congestion 
zones  
b. % reduction in 
average vehicle 
idling time  Increase d fuel 
savings  GHG 
emission s 
reduction  2030  
  AQ 
2.4 Create policy instruments 
and institutional 
mechanisms for  regional 
airshed management  around 
Bengaluru  to address 
aspects of trans -boundary 
air pollution . a. NCAP  
b. Swachh 
Vayu 
Sarvekshan  P: BBMP  
 
S: All allocated 
agencies  a. NCAP 
funds (IX 
Finance)  a. Approval of 
policy and airshed 
management  
b. Number of 
departments  in 
the inter -region 
coordination cell  Improve  
emission data 
repository  
  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   228  
  AQ 
2.5 Include actions aiming at 
carbon capture from the 
environment in the city’s 
Clean Air Action Plan . a. Carbon 
Capture 
Utilisation 
and Storage 
(CCUS)  P: Energy 
Department  -
GoK,  
 
S: KREDL  GoK funds  % of actions 
proposed on 
carbon capture  Increase in 
number of 
projects on 
carbon capture  GHG 
emission s 
reduction  
2035  
  AQ 
2.6 Promote and implement 
urban gardens and 
vegetation cover in the city 
through plantation drives 
(NBS) .   a. Aligned 
with urban 
planning and 
greening -
sector action 
tracks  P: BBMP  
 
S: All allocated 
agencies  GoK funds  
% reduction in 
ambient air 
pollutant 
concentrations  
    Better public 
health,  Increased 
resilience   2027  
AQ-3: Ensure WHO indoor air quality standards and implementation  of guidelines  in all public buildings by 2030 and all other buildings by 2040 . 
Goal/Target: 30% of commercial and institutional buildings complying with WHO Indoor air quality standards and guidelines by 2030 . 
  AQ 
3.1 Provide incentives/subsidies 
to low -income groups to 
procure air purifiers and 
exhaust fans to adopt better 
ventilation within their 
dwelling unit . a. WHO 
indoor air 
quality 
guidelines  P: BEE, BBMP  
 
S: KREDL, 
BESCOM  a. GoK 
funds   
a. % people 
utilising the 
subsidy  a. Improve 
residents’  
lifestyle  
b. Empower 
women  a. Improved 
building 
occupan ts’ 
comfort  2030  
  AQ 
3.2 Conduct sensit isation  
workshops on benefits of 
indoor plants for improving 
indoor air quality. This 
could be supported with 
activities  such as providing 
free sapling s to low -income 
groups.  a. WHO 
indoor air 
quality 
guidelines  P: BBMP  
 
S: KSPCB  NCAP funds 
(IX Finance)  Number  of 
workshops 
conducted  a. Improve 
residents’  
lifestyle  
b. Empower 
women  Improved 
building 
occupan ts’ 
comfort  2025  
  AQ
3.3 Mandate the use of High 
Efficiency Particulate Air 
(HEPA ) filters in vacuum  
cleaner s, air purifiers, and 
air conditioners.  a. WHO 
indoor air 
quality 
guidelines  P: BEE  
 
S: KREDL  GoK funds  % increase in 
efficiency of 
particulate matter 
absorption  Reduce 
residents’  
health risk due 
to particulate 
matter, 
allergens, Improved  
comfort of  
building 
occupan ts  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   229  
pollen, and 
bacteria  
  AQ 
3.4 Conduct regular indoor air 
quality  assessments of all 
public  buildings , priorit ising 
schools and hospitals , by 
2030.   WHO indoor 
air quality 
guidelines  P: BBMP  
 
S: KSPCB  NCAP funds 
(IX Finance)  a. % buildings 
posing health 
risks  
b. % buildings 
compliant with  
ECBC  Improve 
residents’  
lifestyle  Improved  
comfort of  
building 
occupan ts 2030  
  AQ 
3.5 Offer incentives and 
subsidies to all stakeholders 
in the value chain  
(consumers, manufacturers, 
distributors, etc.) to ensure 
the uptake of non -VOC 
materials.  a. Aligned 
with action 
no. E&B 2.7 
b. WHO 
indoor air 
quality 
guidelines  P: BBMP  
 
S: KREDL  NCAP funds 
(IX Finance)  a. % buildings 
adopting  water -
based paints  
b. % buildings 
using VOC -free 
materials (for 
furniture , walls, 
railings etc)  Reduce d 
resident  health 
risk due to 
particulate 
matter, 
allergens, 
pollen, and 
bacteria  Improved 
comfort of 
building 
occupan ts 2030  
AQ-4: Develop a city -level comprehensive Health Action Plan for tackling health risks posed by short -term and long -term exposure to air pollution.  
Goal/Target: Preparation of a roadmap for a comprehensive health action plan tackling risks  due to air pollution for 2025 -2035  
  AQ 
4.1 Organ ise annual free health 
check -ups at ward and city 
levels in collaboration with 
BBMP and the media to 
raise  awareness about the 
health impacts of exposure  
to a high concentration of 
air pollut ants . a. NCAP  
b. Swachh 
Vayu 
Sarvekshan  P: 
Commissionera
te of Health 
and Family 
Welfare  
 
S: BBMP 
Health 
Department  a. Municipal 
corporation 
annual 
budget  
b. NCAP 
funds (IX 
Finance)  a. Number of free 
health check -ups  
b. % reduction in 
health impacts  
c. % reduction in 
air pollutant  
concentrations  a. Improve d 
local health 
resilience  
b. Improve d 
ground -level 
data collection 
and 
dissemination  Improved 
employee 
productivit
y and local 
employmen
t 2025  
  AQ 
4.2 Create a team of health and 
non-health stakeholders to 
evaluate existing health 
system s and services for the 
prevention and control of a. NCAP  
b. Swachh 
Vayu 
Sarvekshan  P: 
Commissionera
te of Health 
and Family 
Welfare  a. Municipal 
corporation 
annual 
budget  
b. NCAP a. Number of 
health facilities 
available for air 
pollution -related 
health issues  Improve d local 
health 
resilience  Improve d 
access  to 
hospitals  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   230  
health impacts due to air 
pollution.   
S: BBMP 
Health 
Department  funds (IX 
Finance)  b. Number of tests 
available to 
diagnose health 
issues caused by 
air pollution  
  AQ 
4.3 Conduct training sessions 
for ground -level health 
workers , such as ASHA 
workers , to deal with air 
pollution -related health 
concerns and risks. Identify  
more such volunteers at the 
local level and train them.  a. NCAP  
b. Swachh 
Vayu 
Sarvekshan  P: 
Commissionera
te of Health 
and Family 
Welfare  
 
S: BBMP 
Health 
Department  a. Municipal 
corporation 
annual 
budget  
b. NCAP 
funds (IX 
Finance)  a. Number of 
workshops and 
training s 
b. Number of 
trained health 
workers  Improve d local 
health 
resilience 
management 
system  Improve d 
local 
employmen
t in health 
sector  2027  
  AQ 
4.4 Raise  awareness  about  
impacts of exposure to air 
pollution amongst street 
vendors and other  informal 
workers continuously 
engaged in activities in 
hotspot zones . a. NCAP  
b. Swachh 
Vayu 
Sarvekshan  P: BBMP  
 
S: BTP  Municipal 
corporation 
annual 
budget  a. % reduction in 
exposure to air  
pollutants  
b. % reduction in 
public gatherings 
in hotspot zones  Improve d local 
health 
resilience  
  2025  
  AQ
4.5 Develop a mechanism  for 
data collection on influenza -
like illness (ILI) , severe 
acute respiratory infections 
(SARI) cases , and related 
hospital admission data on a 
daily basis to monitor 
respiratory illness  trends  
due to poor air quality.  
 
 
  a. NCAP  
b. Swachh 
Vayu 
Sarvekshan  P: 
Commissionera
te of Health 
and Family 
Welfare  
 
S: BBMP 
Health 
Department  a. Municipal 
corporation 
annual 
budget  
b. NCAP 
funds (IX 
Finance)  Approved data 
collection 
management 
system  Improve d local 
health 
resilience 
management 
system  Improve d 
local 
employmen
t in health 
sector  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   231  
AQ-5: Create/improve infrastructure and capacities to develop a robust evidence -based and result -oriented AQ management paradigm through 
monitoring, evaluation, feedback loop, and knowledge creation and dissemination to encourage behavioural  shifts . 
Goal/Target: To procure 13 new CAAQMS and transition the existing manual station to CAAQMS systems by 2035 . 
  AQ
5.1 Procure nowcasting or 
forecasting systems and 
integrate them  with 
CAAQMS to predict accurate 
air pollution levels at 
ward/zone levels. This will 
help the public take 
necessary precautions  and 
avoid unhealthy exposure.  a. NCAP  
b. Swachh 
Vayu 
Sarvekshan  P: KSPCB  
 
S: BBMP  NCAP funds  % CAAQMS 
systems 
integrated  with 
nowcast or 
forecast systems  a. Improve d 
local health 
resilience  a. Weather 
alerts can 
be provided 
too 2030  
  AQ 
5.2 Ensure the monitoring 
systems  are well calibrated  
and maintained to achieve 
uninterrupted  data 
collection from monitoring 
systems.  a. NCAP  
b. Swachh 
Vayu 
Sarvekshan  P: KSPCB  NCAP funds  a. % data gaps in 
CAAQMS systems  
b. % background 
noise in CAAQMS 
systems  a. 
Strengthen ing 
of evidence -
based 
decision -
making  
b. Accurate 
data 
dissemination    2025  
  AQ 
5.3 Ensure accurate ward -wise 
mapping of locations of 
open burning of waste,  
intensify surveillance , and  
impos e fines on defaulters.  a. Action 
aligned with 
SWM  action - 
SWM1.15  
and NCAP  
b. Swachh 
Vayu 
Sarvekshan  P: BBMP  
 
S: KSPCB  NCAP funds  a. % reduction in 
harmful gas 
emissions from 
waste  
b. % reduction in 
open waste 
burning sites  
c. Creation of 
litter -free 
ambassadors for 
each ward  a. Improve 
local health 
resilience  
b. Prevention 
of exposure to 
unwanted 
odour s a. 
Achieve me
nt of  
Swachh 
Bharat 
Abhiyan 
goals  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   232  
  AQ 
5.4 Strengthen the monitoring 
network by adding an 
adequate number of 
reference grade CAAQMS  
and gradually replacing  
existing manual monitoring 
stations with these .  a. NCAP  
b. Swachh 
Vayu 
Sarvekshan  P: KSPCB  
 
S: BBMP  NCAP 
Funds  a. % increase in 
reference 
monitoring 
stations  
b. Determination 
of the number of 
stations required  a. 
Strengthen ing 
of evidence -
based 
decision -
making  
 
b. Better 
triangulation 
of hotspots  
d. Improve d 
airshed 
monitoring 
network  a. Achieve 
Swachh 
Bharat 
Abhiyan 
goals  2030  
  AQ 
5.5 Promote private sector 
players ’ participation in air 
quality monitoring 
ecosystem by providing 
incentives . a. NCAP  
b. Swachh 
Vayu 
Sarvekshan  P: BBMP  
 
S: KSPCB  NCAP 
funds , PPP 
funds  Approved 
promotional 
activity  Number of 
private players 
in AQM 
network    2030  
  AQ 
5.6 Activate citizens' groups to 
monitor and report air 
pollution -related activities 
in their local wards/streets 
at regular intervals. This can 
be done through 
programme s such as ‘self-
monitoring ’.  a. NCAP  
b. Swachh 
Vayu 
Sarvekshan  P: BBMP  
 
S: KSPCB  NCAP 
funds , PPP 
funds  
a. % increase in 
self-monitoring  
b. % reduction in 
open waste 
burning  Creat ion of  a 
micro -level 
monitoring 
network  Achieve 
Swachh 
Bharat 
Abhiyan 
goals  2027  
  AQ
5.7 Institutionali se annual 
auditing process to evaluate 
the performance of 
implemented NCAP 
measures.  Based on the 
assessment , 
underperforming initiatives a. NCAP  
b. Swachh 
Vayu 
Sarvekshan  P: BBMP  
 
S: KSPCB  NCAP funds  a. % performance 
intervention 
audited  
b. % improvement 
in strategies with 
evidence -based 
approach  a. 
Strengthen ing 
of evidence -
based 
decision -
making  
b. Achieve me
nt Swachh 
Bharat 
Abhiyan 
goals  2024  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   233  
can be replaced  with new or 
improved versions.  Discontinu atio
n of funding 
for the actions 
that are 
underperformi
ng  
  AQ 
5.8 Create awareness about 
‘Sick Building Syndrome ’ 
(SBS) through targeted IEC 
campaign for all , and 
prioriti se vulnerable 
populations (children, 
women, elderly and 
marginal ised groups ).  a. NCAP  
b. Swachh 
Vayu 
Sarvekshan  P: BBMP  
 
S: KREDL  NCAP funds  % of people 
experiencing 
inadequate to zero 
indoor comfort  Increase in 
awareness of 
indoor air 
quality and 
thermal 
comfort  Increase in 
ECBC - and 
ENS -
compliant 
buildings  2035  
  AQ 
5.9 Awareness generation on 
ambient air quality , through 
targeted IEC campaigns for 
vulnerable populations 
(children, women, elderly , 
and marginal ised groups ).  a. NCAP  
b. Swachh 
Vayu 
Sarvekshan  P: BBMP  
 
S: KSPCB  NCAP funds  a. Number of 
awareness 
programme s 
conducted  
b. Creation of 
suitable public 
advocacy  and 
awar eness 
materials  Knowledge 
dissemination 
on Air Quality 
Index (AQI) 
and colour  
codes  Achieve me
nt of 
Swachh 
Bharat 
Abhiyan 
goals  2025  
  AQ 
5.10  Develop an open access 
platform to provide timely 
issue of alerts/warnings on 
health risk factors related to 
the AQI and weather 
conditions , obtained from 
IMD / Pollution Control 
Boards.  a. NCAP  
b. Swachh 
Vayu 
Sarvekshan  P: BBMP  
 
S: KSPCB  NCAP funds  a. % increase in 
outreach activities  
for vulnerable 
groups  a. Improve d 
local health 
resilience  
b. Prevention 
of exposure to 
spikes in air 
pollution 
concentration  Achieve me
nt of 
Swachh 
Bharat 
Abhiyan 
goals  2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   234  
5.3.5  Water, wastewater , and storm water management  
Approach  
The w ater, wastewater , and stormwater management approach for the BCAP is arrived  at 
based  on an understanding of the performance of the city, wastewater water treatment 
emissions, and the challenges/gaps and opportunities that the sector faces,  to reduce , adapt 
and build resilience, and to mitigat e emissions from treatment. Hence, in the BCAP , this sector 
is viewed through  an ‘Integrated Urban Water Management ’ (IUWM) lens. With  this 
approach , the city can undertake climate actions to ensure  improved services , water security , 
adaptation and resilience , and emission mitigation . This approach would enhance water 
security, manage water to adapt to and mitigate climate change, and close the gap in the water -
energy -GHG emissions cycle.  Figure 66 illustrates the approach for IUWM.  
Figure 66: Approach for Integrated Urban Water Management  
 
The action tracks and the actions listed below have been drafted considering the aspects of 
improved water access, quality and storage, water and energy efficiency, access to urban 
commons, enhanced livelihood and well -being, job creation, improved health, social and 
gender equity, reduced urban heat islands , and flood risk relating  to the sector.  
Sectoral action tracks  
No. Action t racks  
W, WW, SW - 1 Enhance access to safe and reliable water and sanitation services for al l. 
W, WW, SW - 2 Ensure water security by conserving water resources, recycling and safe reuse 
of wastewater, and diversifying the city's sources of water . 
W, WW, SW - 3 Restore and enhance sponge spaces to increase groundwater  recharge and 
decrease stormwater runoff  through green infrastructure technologies . 
W, WW, SW - 4 Adopt improved technologies and nature -based solutions for efficient and 
equitable wastewater treatment that are aligned to the city's mitigation goals . 
 
 Improve
Ensure complete 
access to safe and 
reliable water and 
sanitation servicesSecure/Conserve
Promote 
conservation, 
recycling and 
reuse, and 
diversification of 
water sourcesAdapt
Increasing 
groundwater 
recharge and 
reducing 
stormwater runoff 
with improved 
sponge places in 
the cityMitigate
Encourage nature -
based solutions for 
wastewater 
treatment
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   235  
Track -wise actions  Priority  
S.No  Actions  Aligned 
with 
(ongoing 
initiatives/oth
er actions)  Responsible 
Agency  
Primary (P)  
Secondary (S)  Potential 
Source of 
funding  Output  Outcome  Co-benefit  Timeline  
(Targeted 
year of 
completion 
of action)  
W,WW,SW - 1: Enhance access to safe and reliable water and sanitation services for all . 
Goal/Target: 100% households to have access to water and sanitation infrastructure and services , which are a combination of networked and decentral ised systems.  
  W, 
WW,  
SW-  
1.1. Ensure supply of safe 
water across the city  
(including 110 villages) by 
providing piped water 
supply, ward/community 
level water storage 
facilities, and stand 
posts/public taps located 
within a 100-m radius , so 
that the vulnerable 
wards/slums/poor areas 
have access to reliable 
water and improved 
services.  BWSSB 
vision 
documents. 
Karnataka 
State Water 
Policy , 
BWSSB Act, 
SDG -6 P: BWSSB  
 
S: BBMP  Slum 
Development 
Board  GoK, Beneficiary 
Capital 
Contribution 
(BCC), Greater 
Bangalore Water 
and Sanitation 
Project 
(GBWASP) and 
AMRUT (Atal 
Mission for 
Rejuvenation and 
Urban 
Transformation).  a. Water supply 
coverage (% 
population 
covered)  
b. Total number 
of 
standposts/publi
c taps in 
vulnerable 
communities  
c. Total number 
of 
slums/househol
ds dependent on 
non-piped water 
facilities.  a. Increased 
supply of water 
across the city , 
including 
vulnerable 
communities.  
b. Reduced 
transportation of 
water from  far-off 
water sources  
c. Reduced 
dependency on 
illegal 
groundwater  
extraction.  a. Improved 
health, 
livelihood and 
well-being . 
b. Increased 
water and 
energy 
efficiency.  
c. Gender 
equality  
d. Improved 
conditions of 
poor 
communities  
e. Reduced  use 
of polluted 
water.  
f. Equitable 
and improved 
supply of 
water . 
g. Reduced 
GHG 
emissions  
from 2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   236  
transport.  
h. Increased 
job 
opportunities  
  W, 
WW,  
SW-  
1.2 Publish ward -level data in 
open access platform on 
actual consumption of 
public supply/piped water 
across the city by different 
customer groups to plan 
for better equitable supply.    P: BWSSB  
  GoK, own funds 
of BWSSB  a. 
Ward/communit
y level water 
consumption 
data  
b. 
Ward/communit
y level data for 
different water 
consumers  
c. Total number  
of households 
with piped water 
supply  
d. Total number 
of households 
with other 
decentralised  
systems  a. Actual water 
consumption 
data of the city 
based on various  
consumer 
groups/localities.  a. Improved 
health, 
livelihood , and 
well-being  
b. Increased 
water and 
energy 
efficiency  
c. Gender 
equality  
d. Improved 
conditions of 
poor 
communities  
e. Reduced use 
of polluted 
water  
f. Equitable 
and improved  
water  supply  
g. Reduced 
GHG 
emissions  
from transport  
h. Increased 
job 
opportunities  2025  
  W, 
WW,  
SW-  
1.3 Based on the available data 
on actual water 
consumption, revisit 
service benchmarks for the 
city and distribute piped 
water as per actual 
consumption to improve 
equitable access to water.    P: BWSSB  
  GoK, own funds 
of BWSSB  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   237  
  W, 
WW,  
SW-  
1.4 Collect and publish ward -
level data on the actual 
requirement for public 
toilet s across the city to 
eradicate open defecation 
and improve hygiene.  Swachh 
Bharat  
Mission, 
SDG -6 P: BBMP -Slum 
Development 
Board  
  Swachh Bharat  
Mission, Shubhra 
Bengaluru 
Scheme  a. Ward-level 
data on coverage 
of toilets  
b. Total number 
of public toilets 
required to be 
construct ed in 
the city.   
c. Total number 
of households 
connected to 
sewage system  a. Increased 
access to 
sanitation 
services   
b. Gender -neutral 
sanitation 
facilities  a. Improved 
health, 
livelihood and 
well-being   
b. Improved 
sanitation 
services   
c. Improved 
conditions of 
poor 
communities  
d. Increased 
job 
opportunities  
e. Reduced 
contamination 
and air 
pollution  
  W, 
WW,  
SW-  
1.5 Provide safe sanitation 
service s to all households , 
construct 
public/community toilets 
in urban poor 
pockets/slums/public 
places as per universal 
accessibility standards , 
including gender -neutral 
toilets , with adequate 
sewage treatment and 
management facilities to 
ensure improved services 
and safe access for all 
vulnerable groups.  Swachh 
Bharat  
Mission, 
SDG -6 P: BBMP -Slum 
Development 
Board  Swachh Bharat  
Mission, Shubhra 
Bengaluru 
Scheme  a. Total sewerage 
network in the 
city 
b. Total number 
of 
public/communi
ty toilets 
constructed 
across the city  
that are 
accessible for  
vulnerable 
communities . a. Increased 
access to 
sanitation 
services   
b. Gender neutral 
sanitation 
facilities  a. Improved 
health, 
livelihood and 
wellbeing  
b. Improved 
sanitation 
services  
c. Improved 
conditions of 
poor 
communities  
d. Increased 
job 
opportunities  
e. Reduced 
contamination 2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   238  
and air 
pollution  
W, WW,  SW -2: Ensure water security by conserving water resources, recycling and safe reuse of wastewater, and diversifying the city's sour ces of water . 
Goal/Target: By 2050, aim to reduce non -revenue water to 15%. Achieve reuse of treated wastewater to a minimum of 50% by 2030 and 90% by 2050.  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
2.1 Implement the concept of 
District Meter Areas 
(DMAs) in all eight zones 
(in line with  the pilot 
conducted in 135  sq. km. 
in the city) by dividing  
water distribution areas 
into smaller units ( based 
on availability of funds) to 
facilitate equitable 
distribution, better 
monitoring, reduced T&D 
loss, and non-revenue 
water ( NRW , such as 
unbilled or unmetered BWSSB 
vision 
document,  
Bengaluru 
Water 
Supply 
(Amendment
) Regulation, 
2020  P: BWSSB  
  GoK, BWSSB , 
GBWASP , 
AMRUT  a. Total metered 
connections   
b. Total illegal 
connections   
c. Total unbilled 
connections   
d. Total 
unmetered 
connections  
e. Data on water 
distribution  
units  a. Reduced T&D 
loss 
b. Reduced NRW 
loss  
c. Increased 
equitable  
distribution   
d. Per capita 
supply reduction  a. Increased 
water and 
energy 
efficiency  
b. Reduced 
water loss and 
increased 
water 
conservation  2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   239  
connections, illegal 
connections, and physical 
water leakages) . 
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
2.2 Conduct regular audits for 
water infrastructure by 
applying  advanced 
technologies to identify the 
need for upgrad es, 
refurbishment, and 
replacement , to minimise 
leakage and contamination 
during disasters such as 
floods.  BWSSB 
vision 
document,  
Bengaluru 
Water 
Supply 
(Amendment
) Regulation, 
2020  P: BWSSB  
  GoK, BWSSB , 
GBWASP , 
AMRUT  a. Water 
infrastructure 
audit  
b. Total 
infrastructure 
that needs to be 
upgraded  a. Reduced 
leakages  
b. Improved 
water 
infrastructure  a. Reduced 
water 
contamination  
b. Increased 
job 
opportunities  
c. Improved 
climate -
resilient  
infrastructure  2025  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
2.3 Conduct regular energy 
audits through a 
participatory approach , to 
monitor energy intensity 
of water supply network , 
and to minimise energy 
used utilisation  for water  
supply .  Energy audit 
report  –
BESCOM  P: BWSSB, 
BESCOM  BESCOM funds  a. Energy audit 
of water  
b. Total expenses 
on pumping and 
transporting 
water from 
Cauvery to the 
city.  a. Reduced 
energy usage for 
pumping, 
treatment , and 
supply  a. Reduced 
energy usage 
and GHG 
emissions  2040  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
2.4 In continuation o f District 
Meter Areas ( DMAs ), 
make an incremental plan 
for creating a smart water 
grid by learning from 
global best practices , to 
ensure better network 
resilience.  Bengaluru 
Water 
Supply 
(Amendment
) Regulation, 
2020  P: BWSSB  
  GoK, BWSSB -
GBWASP , 
AMRUT  a. Plan to 
implement 
advanced smart 
water grid for 
efficient water 
supply network.  
b. Complete 
database on 
water pressure, 
availability, 
contamination, 
and a. Improved 
water 
distribution and 
management   
b. Lower 
maintenance of 
distribution 
system  a. Improved 
water quality  
b. Improved 
climate -
resilient  
infrastructure  2040  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   240  
defects/damages 
in the water 
distribution 
system  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   241  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
2.5 Get approval from the 
government to implement  
a tariff structure for 
different consumer 
segments to reflect the 
true cost of water from  
different water sources 
(differential tariff , 
volumetric tariff , etc.) to 
achieve socially equitable 
and financially sustainable 
utility. For instance, this 
could mean p ricing 
instruments such as 
increasing block -rate 
structures and charges for 
excess use , so that users 
pay more for higher levels 
of consumption, or 
differentiate d tariffs for 
potable and non -potable 
water to limit freshwater 
use for non -potable 
purposes . Bengaluru 
Water 
Supply 
(Amendment
) Regulation, 
2020  P: BWSSB  
  BWSSB -GBWASP  a. Differential 
tariff structure  
b. Total potable 
and non -potable 
water 
consumption 
data  a. Improved true 
cost of water  
b. Socially 
equitable and 
financially 
sustainable utility  
c. Enhanced 
water access  
d. Reduced fresh 
water use for 
non-potable 
purposes  a. Improved 
accountability 
and 
transparency.  
b. Improved 
water 
efficiency  
c. Reduced 
GHG 
emissions 
from pumping 
excess fresh 
water for all 
types of uses.  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   242  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
2.6 Encourage/create 
incentive mechanisms 
within the water tariff 
system for greater uptake 
of water and energy -
efficient  appliances , 
fixtures in homes, 
institutions , etc., to ensure 
judicious water and energy 
consumption.  BWSSB 
vision 
document,  
Bengaluru 
Water 
Supply 
(Amendment
) Regulation, 
2020  P: BWSSB  
 
S: BESCOM  BWSSB -GBWASP  a. Increase in 
water - and 
energy -efficient  
appliances and 
fixtures  a. Reduced 
indoor potable 
water use  
b. Reduced water 
consumption to 
save energy   
c. Improved 
environmental 
well-being  a. Reduced 
energy use 
b. Reduced 
water 
consumption  2025  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
2.7 Sensit ise consumers and 
water technicians 
(plumbers) regarding   
water conservation and 
energy -efficien t practices 
by conducting regular 
(quarterly/half yearly) IEC 
campaigns at the ward 
level in partnership with 
NGOs, civil society 
platforms, citizen s’ 
forums, academic 
institutions , etc. (Leverage 
existing outreach facilities  
such as RWH theme park , 
Jayanagar .) BWSSB 
vision 
document, 
Karnataka 
State Water 
Policy  P: BWSSB  
  Jal Jeevan 
Mission IEC 
funds  a. Total no. of 
IEC campaigns 
conducted  
b. List /Database  
of plumbers 
across the city  Increased 
awareness on 
water and energy 
efficiency and 
conservation  Increased 
water 
conservation 
through 
judicious use 
of water  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   243  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
2.8 Mandate regular and 
targeted training 
programme s 
(quarterly /half yearly)  for 
officials/engineers/ground 
workers in water utility 
and other relevant 
government department s, 
on water conservation 
devices and practices , such 
as usage of control valves 
for water pumping to 
maintain flow  pressure  in 
the network to reduce 
losses and avoid 
unnecessary energy 
consumption.  BWSSB 
vision 
document, 
Karnataka 
State water 
Policy  P: BWSSB  
  Jal Jeevan 
Mission IEC 
funds  Database on 
total number of 
trainings/works
hops  conducted  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
2.9 Prepare and enforce 
adequate regulatory 
instruments to control and 
monitor groundwater 
extraction and the private 
water tanker business , to 
ensure sustainable use of 
groundwater and avoid 
over -exploitation of 
groundwater resources.  Karnataka 
State Water 
Policy , 
Karnataka 
Ground 
Water 
(Regulation 
and Control 
of 
Development 
and 
Management
), 2011  P: BBMP, 
KGWA  
 
S: BWSSB, 
RTO, 
BESCOM  BBMP, RTO ’s 
own funds 
(Bhoojala  Yojana -
BWSSB)  Regulatory 
instrument to 
control 
groundwater  
extraction :  
a. Total number 
of trade licensed 
water tanker 
operators.b. 
Total number of 
permitted 
domestic 
borewellsc. 
Condition  of the 
tankers  
d. Total a. Reduced illegal 
tanker operators  
b. Reduced illegal 
borewell s  
c. Database of 
households 
dependent on 
tankers  a. Increased 
water 
conservation  
b. Judicious 
and safe use of 
alternative 
water sources  
c. Improved 
quality of 
water supply  
d. Improved 
livelihood and 
job 
opportunities  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   244  
extraction of 
water from wells  
e. Travelling 
location and 
distance of 
tankers  
f. Total number 
of metered 
commercial 
borewells  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
2.10  Create aquifer plan that 
includes participatory 
aquifer mapping of 
groundwater levels across 
the city and publish it on 
the open access platform , 
to ascertain water resource 
availability and  identify  
actions to recharge and 
replenish groundwater  
sources . Karnataka 
State Water 
Policy , 
Karnataka 
Ground 
Water 
(Regulation 
and Control 
of 
Development 
and 
Management
), 2012  P: KGWA  
 
S: BWSSB, 
CGWB, 
KSPCB, BBMP  PPP  Aquifer plan 
with maps and 
water levels :  
a. Database on 
total number of 
borewells, depth, 
diameter, rate of 
pumping , etc.  
b. Database on 
groundwater 
levels across the 
city 
c. Total current 
discharge rate, 
quantity of water 
extracted per day 
of the borewell   a. Improved 
recharge and 
replenishment of 
groundwater 
sources   
b. Improved 
conservation of 
water  a. Sustainable 
alternative 
water source s 
b. Improved 
groundwater 
quality and 
quantity  
c. Reduced 
water 
pollution  
d. Increased 
energy 
efficiency  
e. Increased 
job 
opportunities  
and improved 
livelihood and 
well-being  
f. Reduced 
stormwater 
runoff  2030  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
2.11 Integrate renewable 
groundwater  sources as a 
buffer source to increase 
freshwater storage and 
replenish the groundwater 
aquifer.  Karnataka 
State Water 
Policy , 
Karnataka 
Ground 
Water 
(Regulation 
and Control 
of 
Development 
and P: KGWA  
 
S: BWSSB, 
CGWB, 
KSPCB, BBMP  PPP  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   245  
Management
), 2013  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
2.12  Create a plan for 
constructing groundwater  
recharge pits across the 
city to increase 
groundwater  recharge and 
reduce stormwater runoff 
to expand fresh water 
sources . Karnataka 
State Water 
Policy , 
Karnataka 
Ground 
Water 
(Regulation 
and Control 
of 
Development 
and 
Management
), 2014  P: KGWA  
 
S: BWSSB, 
CGWB, 
KSPCB, BBMP  PPP  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
2.13  Rejuvenate existing 
groundwater  wells by 
involving communities and 
using local traditional 
knowledge to enhance 
access to water , increase 
groundwater  recharge , and 
create livelihood 
opportunities.  Karnataka 
State Water 
Policy , 
Karnataka 
Ground 
Water 
(Regulation 
and Control 
of 
Development 
and 
Management
), 2015  P: KGWA  
 
S: BWSSB, 
CGWB, 
KSPCB, BBMP  PPP  Rejuvenation of 
groundwater  
wells  
a. Total number 
and location of 
borewells to be 
rejuvenated   
b. Database on 
local 
communities 
and traditional 
techni ques to 
rejuvenate 
groundwater  
wells   Improved 
groundwater  
wells condition 
and recharge 
potential  a. Improved 
livelihood and 
increased job 
opportunities.
b. Increased 
water storage 
and 
availability  
c. Improved  
water quality  2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   246  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
2.14  Rejuvenate and revive the 
TG Halli reservoir to 
reduce dependency on 
other far -off sources and 
augment the city’s water 
supply (subject to the 
release of 1.2 TMC of 
allocated water)  BWSSB 
vision 
document  P: BWSSB  
  GoK, BWSSB -
GBWASP , 
AMRUT  Amount of water 
that can be 
supplied through 
TG Halli 
reservoir.  Diverse water 
source s a. Reduced 
energy 
utilisation  for 
pumping water 
from Cauvery  
b. Reduced 
transport  of 
water  2035  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
2.15 Ensure strict enforcement 
of rainwater harvesting at 
the plot/community level 
across the city , to increase 
groundwater recharge and 
improve water and energy 
efficiency by reducing 
dependency on Cauvery 
piped water supply, 
pumping, water 
transportation and 
unauthorised/illegal water 
extraction.  Bengaluru 
Water 
Supply and 
Sewerage 
(Rainwater 
harvesting) 
(Amendment
) Regulation , 
2019 ; BBMP 
Building 
Bye-laws , 
2003 ; and 
BWSSB Act , 
2009 and 
Regulations , 
2015  P: BBMP  
 
S: BWSSB  BBMP budget  Citywide total 
number of 
rainwater 
harvesting 
structures , 
location , and 
capacity  Increased 
groundwater  
recharge and 
reduced 
dependency on 
municipal water 
supply  a. Reduced 
stormwater 
runoff  
b. Increased 
water storage  
c. Improved 
water quality  
d. Increased 
water and 
energy 
efficiency  
e. Job creation 
and livelihood 
opportunities  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   247  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
2.16  Integrate multiple funding 
streams to implement 
extensive rainwater 
harvesting  (RWH) , lake 
rejuvenation projects , etc., 
through a participatory 
approach , to promote 
water and energy 
conservation, and water 
security.  Bengaluru 
Water 
Supply and 
Sewerage 
(Rainwater 
harvesting) 
(Amendment
) Regulation , 
2019 ; BBMP 
Building 
Bye-laws  
2003 ; 
BWSSB Act 
2009 , and 
Regulations , 
2016 ; 
Karnataka 
Lake 
Conservation 
and 
Development 
Authority 
(KLCDA) 
Act, 2014  P: BBMP - 
Karnataka 
Tank 
Conservation 
and 
Development 
Authority 
(KTCDA), 
Forest 
Department  
 
S: BWSSB, 
KSPCB  BBMP budget  a. Increased 
investment in 
lake 
rejuvenation and 
RWH  
b. List and map 
of all lakes in the 
city and their  
condition  Increased lake 
rejuvenation and 
RWH project s, 
and awareness 
about  water 
security  a. Improved  
water quality 
and storage  
b. Improved 
biodiversity  
c. Access to 
urban 
commons  
d. Enhanced 
livelihood  
e. Job creation  
f. Improved 
health and 
well-being  2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   248  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
2.17 Implement participatory 
and inclusive lake 
rejuvenation projects by 
involving the local 
community in clean ing 
and maintain ing water 
bodies to secure  local 
watershed with recharge, 
improve d water quality, 
protect  biodiversity, 
improve access to urban 
commons , and enhance 
livelihood opportunities.   Bengaluru 
Water 
Supply and 
Sewerage 
(Rainwater 
Harvesting ) 
(Amendment
) Regulation , 
2019 ; BBMP 
Building 
Bye-laws  
2003 ; and 
BWSSB Act , 
2009 and 
Regulations , 
2016 ; and  
Karnataka 
Lake 
Conservation 
and 
Development 
Authority 
(KLCDA) , 
ACT 2014  P: BBMP - 
Karnataka 
Tank 
Conservation 
and 
Development 
Authority 
(KTCDA), 
Forest 
Department  
 
S: BWSSB, 
KSPCB  BBMP budget  a. Increased 
investment in 
lake 
rejuvenation and 
RWH  
b. List and map 
of all lakes in the 
city and their  
condition  Increased lake 
rejuvenation and 
RWH 
projects/ proposal
s, and awareness 
about  water 
security  a. Increased 
water quality 
and storage  
b. Improved 
biodiversity  
c. Access to 
urban 
commons  
d. Enhanced 
livelihood  
e. Job creation  
f. Improved 
health and 
well-being  2030  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
2.18  Prohibit  disposal of 
phosphate -containing 
fertilisers, detergents and 
sewage into water bodies , 
and ensure the recovery of 
phosphorus from 
wastewater , to reduce 
dependency on chemical 
fertil isers to improve the 
quality of water bodies.  Karnataka 
Lake 
Conservation 
and 
Development 
Authority 
(KLCDA) 
ACT , 2014 ; 
Zero Liquid P: KSPCB  
 
S: BBMP, 
BWSSB  GoK  Standards on 
prohibition on 
disposal of 
chemicals in 
water bodies  Decreased 
discharge  a. Improved  
water quality  
b.  Minimal  
wastewater 
discharge  
c.  Maximum  
resource 
recovery  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   249  
Discharge 
(ZLD ) Policy  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
2.19  Build awareness  amongst  
public and private 
stakeholders on ZLD 
national -level framework 
for reuse of treated 
wastewater . Karnataka 
Lake 
Conservation 
and 
Development 
Authority 
(KLCDA) 
ACT , 2014 ; 
ZLD Policy  P: BWSSB, 
Forest 
Department , 
KSPCB  
 
S: BBMP  GoK  Total no. of 
awareness 
programme s 
conducted  Increased 
awareness about  
reuse potential of 
treated 
wastewater  2025  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
2.20  Enable appropriate market 
mechanisms/business 
models to connect bulk 
wastewater generators that 
are registered in a n open 
access database , with large 
consumers to ensure 
adherence to ZLD policy. 
(ZLD policy should allow 
sale of treated wastewater 
to bulk consumers for non -
potable use .)  Karnataka 
Lake 
Conservation 
and 
Development 
Authority 
(KLCDA) 
ACT 2014, 
ZLD Policy  P: KSPCB  
 
S: BWSSB  GoK  Market/platform 
for treated water 
sale  
a. Database on 
bulk wastewater 
generators  
b. Different 
types of business  
models to 
improve 
wastewater by -
products  
c. Increased 
reuse of treated 
water  Improved usage 
of wastewater by -
products  a. Increased 
alternate water 
sources  
b. Reduced 
water 
pollution  
c. Increased 
access to water  2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   250  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
2.21  Pilot -test advanced water 
reclamation systems such 
as NE Water, Singapore , 
for the city to ensure 
recycling and safe reuse of 
wastewater . BWSSB 
vision 
document  P: BWSSB  
  BWSSB ’s own 
funds  Advanced water 
reclamation 
systems in the 
city Improve d 
recycling and 
reuse  of treated 
water  a. Increased 
reuse of water  
b. Decreased 
water 
pollution  
c. Improved 
health and 
safety  
d. Reduced 
water scarcity  2040  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
2.22  Enhance uptake of dual 
piping/plumbing system at 
the household level to 
increase reuse of 
wastewater within the 
premises , to reduce 
dependency on fresh water 
for non-potable purposes.  BWSSB 
vision 
document  P: BWSSB  
  BWSSB ’s own 
funds  Database on 
total dual -piping 
domestic 
connections in 
the city  Increased 
recycling and 
reuse of treated 
wastewater  2030  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
2.23  Mandate a percentage of  
daily  use of treated 
wastewater by bulk 
generators at large 
residential complexes, 
commercial, industrial 
zones, public 
parks/gardens/green 
spaces and all corporate 
gardens by 2026. Enforce 
increased usage of treated 
wastewater for bulk 
generators (as per ZLD 
policy) .  BWSSB 
vision 
document  P: BWSSB  
  BWSSB ’s own 
funds  a. Percentage of 
daily use of 
treated water  
b. List of 
customers using 
treated 
wastewater  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   251  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
2.24  Use treated wastewater to 
rejuvenate lakes, especially 
in peripheral/adjoining 
areas of the city . This can 
be used for cultivation by 
farmers and other 
appropriate purposes to 
ensure groundwater 
replenishment, reduced 
nutrients for farmers, 
alternative livelihood 
opportunities , and social 
cohesion.  
 
 
 
 
 
  BWSSB 
vision 
document  P: BWSSB  BWSSB ’s own 
funds  a. Increased 
treated water 
usage by farmers 
for cultivation  
b. List of lakes in 
peripheral areas   
c. Farming 
activities that are 
dependent on 
lakes  Increased 
recycling and 
reuse of treated 
wastewater  a. Increased 
reuse of water  
b. Decreased 
water 
pollution  
c. Improved 
health and 
safety  
d. Reduced 
water scarcity  
e. Improved 
livelihood  2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   252  
W, WW,  SW- 3: Restore and enhance sponge spaces to increase groundwater  recharge and decrease stormwater runoff  through green infrastructure 
technologies . 
Goal/Target:  40% of city’s surface area to become permeable by 2040 by reclaiming ecologically sensitive spaces and adopting nature -based solutions .  
                        Convert 75% of the city’s footpaths to permeable surface material by 2050 . 
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
3.1 Prepare a policy on 
stormwater management 
(such as promoting best 
practice s for  stormwater  
management in urban 
areas, including the  
need for stormwater 
catchment)  that enables 
effective integration of 
blue -green network of the 
city and enhances 
opportunities for nature -
based solutions and hybrid 
infrastructure .   P: BBMP - 
Stormwater 
Drainage 
Department  
 
S: BDA  BBMP -SWD 
annual 
maintenance  fund  A policy on 
stormwater 
management  Opportunity to 
use stormwater 
runoff as a water 
supply source  a. Decreased 
runoff  
b. Improved 
public health  
c. Social equity  
d. Decreased 
water 
pollution  
e. Climate -
resilient 
infrastructure  
f. Increased 
water recharge  
g. Reduced 
urban heat 
islands  
h. Reduced 
flood risk  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   253  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
3.2 Develop and enhance 
sponge spaces, implement 
low-impact development 
and NBS in stormwater 
management for the city  
(such as wetland 
development that can 
absorb rain water  and 
floodwater, green roofs, 
urban gardens (open green 
spaces and plantation), 
permeable l ow concrete 
surfaces, stormwater tree 
trenches to ensure 
recharge of rainwater and 
to create small - and large -
scale capture , from 
retention vaults under  
parks to ponds in 
community gardens) .  Aligned with 
action no . 
UPGBD - 3.3  Provides 
hydrologically 
functioning 
landscape  Low -cost and 
energy -efficient  
infrastructure  2025  
  W,W
W,SW
- 3.3 Prepare a complete spatial 
database (open access) on 
the stormwater drainage 
network indicating the 
type/ hierarchy of drains 
(primary/secondary/ tertia
ry) and update the SWD 
master plan.   Aligned with 
action no. 
DM-1.4 P: BBMP - 
Stormwater 
drainage 
department  
 
S: BDA  BBMP -SWD 
annual 
maintenance  fund  Coverage of 
stormwater 
drainage 
network 
(primary , 
secondary , and 
tertiary ) with 
lengths . Complete 
stormwater 
drainage network 
map  a. Decreased 
runoff and 
increased 
stormwater 
collection  
b. Reduced 
pollution  
c. Improved 
climate -
resilient 
infrastructure  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   254  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
3.4 Assess the capacity and 
extent of existing drainage 
network to evaluate its 
functioning in various 
extreme rainfall scenarios.  Aligned with 
action no. 
DM- 1.4 P: BBMP - 
Stormwater 
Drainage 
Department  
 
S: BDA  BBMP -SWD 
annual 
maintenance  fund  Analysis of 
drainage 
network capacity 
to hold 
stormwater  
a. Precipitation  
and Rainfall 
intensity/runoff  
b. characteristics 
of catchment 
areas  
c. Pollutant load 
d. data on 
incidence of 
water 
logging/floods  Detailed 
performance 
assessment of 
stormwater 
network  Flood control  2025  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
3.5 Upgrade, improve , and 
expand the existing 
stormwater drainage 
network as per the SWD 
policy informed by spatial 
database.  
 
 
 
   Aligned with 
action no. 
DM-1.4  P: BBMP - 
Stormwater 
drainage 
department  
 
S: BDA  BBMP -SWD 
annual 
maintenance  fund  Improved 
drainage 
network  
a. Total number 
of stormwater 
drains that are 
encroached  
b. Total number 
of drains that 
need upgrade s Increased 
drainage network 
condition  a. Decreased 
runoff and 
increased 
stormwater 
collection  
b. Reduced 
pollution  
c. Improved 
climate -
resilient 
infrastructure  2025  
W, WW,  SW- 4: Adopt improved technologies and nature -based solutions for efficient and equitable wastewater treatment that are aligned to the city's 
mitigation goals . 
Goal/Target: 95% wastewater treatment with a combination of centralised and decentralised system with about 61% low-carbon wastewater treatment technologies 
by 2050 .  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   255  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
4.1 Implement low-
carbon/energy wastewater 
treatment plants with 
resource recovery 
facilities , including 
nutrient recovery , which  
recover elements from  
wastewater , apart from 
treated wastewater , such 
as nutrients (nitrogen 
removal and phosphorus 
recovery), and energy.   BWSSB 
vision 
document, 
Draft 
National 
Policy on the 
Safe Reuse of 
Treated 
Wastewater  P: BWSSB  
  AMRUT  Total list and 
capacities of low-
carbon/energy 
wastewater 
treatment plants 
in the city  a. Water quality 
standards  
b. Level of DO, 
phosphorous,  
nitrates, nitrites, 
faecal  matter  
c. Level of 
sedimentation  in 
freshwater and 
marine  
water bodies  Reduced GHG 
emissions  2030  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
4.2 Upgrade existing public 
STPs to meet CPCB ’s 
revised treated effluent 
standards and ensure the 
new STPs that are going to 
be constructed are meeting 
the standards  (Treatment 
to the level required) . BWSSB vison  
document, 
Draft 
National 
Policy on the 
Safe Reuse of 
Treated 
Wastewater  P: BWSSB  
 
S: KSPCB  AMRUT  a. Coverage of 
wastewater 
treatment 
network services 
b. Quality of 
wastewater 
treatment   
c. Collection 
efficiency of 
wastewater   
d. Adequacy of 
wastewater 
treatment 
capacity  Efficiently 
functioning STPs  a. Reduced 
pollution and 
odour   
b. Improve 
health  2030  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
4.3 Conduct regular energy 
audits through 
participatory approach to 
monitor energy intensity 
of sewerage network and 
wastewater treatment 
plants . Energy audit 
report  – 
BESCOM  P: BWSSB, 
BESCOM  BESCOM funds  a. Energy audit 
of water  
b. Total expenses 
on pumping and 
transporting 
water from 
Cauvery to the 
city.  Reduced energy 
usage for 
pumping, 
treatment , and 
supply  Reduced 
energy usage 
and GHG 
emissions  2040  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   256  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
4.4 Conduct regular IEC 
campaigns on low-
carbon/energy wastewater 
treatment and reuse 
potential , in partnership 
with stakeholders such as 
NGOs, civil society 
platforms, citizen s’ 
forums, RWAs, academic 
institutions, and Pollution 
Control Board , to sensit ise 
citizens about  treated 
water reuse and to nudge 
social behaviour  change .   Draft 
National 
Policy on the  
 Safe Reuse 
of Treated 
Wastewater  P: BWSSB  
  Jal Jeevan 
Mission IEC 
funds  Database on 
ward -level IEC 
campaigns  Increased 
awareness on 
wastewater reuse , 
and recycl ing 
potential , and 
energy efficiency  Reduced 
untreated 
wastewater 
discharge  2025  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
4.5 Prepare a plan for 
incremental shift towards 
improved and more 
efficient technologies to 
minim ise GHG emissions 
from wastewater and 
encourage and incentiv ise 
low-carbon/energy 
solutions for decentralised 
wastewater treatment in 
neighbourhood s/large 
residential 
complexes/public places/ 
institutional complexes , 
especially with biological 
treatment with low energy 
consumption and 
enhanced mitigation 
benefits (need to meet the Draft 
National 
Policy on the 
Safe Reuse of 
Treated 
Wastewater  P: BWSSB  
  AMRUT, BWSSB 
own funds  a. Incentives for 
low-carbon 
wastewater 
treatment plants  
b. A detailed 
plan to shift 
towards low -
carbon  
treatment  
c. Total number 
of centralised 
and 
decentralised 
wastewater 
treatment   
d. Total number 
of low-carbon 
wastewater 
treatment plants  More  
decentralised 
low-carbon 
wastewater 
treatment 
facilities  a. Reduced 
GHG 
emissions  
b. Increased 
low-carbon 
water 
treatment  2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   257  
standards for irrigation /fit 
for purpose) . 
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
4.6 Maintain a complete open 
access database on private 
STPs across the city .   P: KSPCB  KSPCB ’s own 
funds  List of private 
STPs across the 
city   Increased job 
opportunities  2025  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
4.7 Conduct regular 
inspections of private STPs 
and revisit STP approval 
process to ensure effective 
performance of private 
STPs .   P: KSPCB  KSPCB ’s own 
funds  List of 
inspections 
conducted to 
check 
installation and 
performance of 
STPs  Effective 
performance of 
STPs  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   258  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
4.8 Conduct  mandatory 
training sessions for 
operators and service 
providers on the operation 
and maintenance of 
private STPs , as a part of 
the approval process .   P: KSPCB  KSPCB ’s own 
funds  a. O&M training 
session modules  
b. List of 
consumers and 
service providers  
c. Manpower 
dataset  Improved 
wastewater 
treatment  a. Improved 
skilled labour  
b. Reduced 
water 
pollution  
c. Increased 
energy 
efficiency  
d. Improved 
livelihood and 
job 
opportunities  2025  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
4.9 Ensure implementation of 
NAMASTE Scheme , to 
eradicate unsafe sewer and 
septic -tank cleaning 
practices introduced  in 
February 2023  by the 
Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment.  NAMASTE 
Scheme, 
2023  P: BBMP  
  NAMASTE 
Scheme  a. IEC campaign  
b. Livelihood 
assistance  
c. Identification  
of sewer/septic 
tank workers 
(SSW)  
d. Occupational 
training and 
distribution  of 
PPE kits to SSWs   Ensure safety of 
sanitation 
workers  a. Improved 
livelihood and 
health of 
workers  
b. Reduced 
pollution  2025  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
4.10 Create a market for by -
products of wastewater 
treatment , making 
wastewater treatment 
plants more 
environmentally and 
financially sustainable. 
(Enforce ZLD and build in 
flexibility .)   P: BWSSB  
  BWSSB ’s own 
funds  Market for 
wastewater by-
products  and 
a. list of business 
models 
supporting 
wastewater by-
products  sale 
b. List of 
consumers and 
sellers  Recovery of 
water, energy, 
and nutrients  a. Reduced 
GHG 
emission s 
b. Improved 
energy 
efficiency  
c. Improved 
health  
d. Improved 
livelihood and 
job creation  2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   259  
c. Price of by-
products  
d. Type of by-
products  and 
usage  
  W, 
WW,  
SW- 
4.11 Explore innovative 
financing 
mechanisms/business 
partnerships  (such as 
micro -contributions, taxes, 
public -private 
partnerships , and market -
based financial 
transactions) that can 
encourage the 
development of and 
investment in wastewater 
systems to deliver cost-
effective wastewater 
infrastructure.    P: BWSSB  
  BWSSB ’s own 
funds  a. PPP  
b. Incentives and 
sufficient 
financial sources  Cost effective 
delivery of 
wastewater 
treatment  2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   260  
5.3.6   Urban planning , greening , and biodiversity   
Approach  
A three -pronged approach has been identified for arriving at the action tracks and actions for 
the urban planning, greening , and biodiversity sector. This is  based on the sectoral analysis 
and gap assessment carried out for this sector.  Climate -conscious, nature -integrated , and 
people -centric  are the major lenses through which  this sector should be seen . Urban planning 
and greening activities can address climate change and its impacts by reducing emissions and 
building resilience. Urban planning should respond to the natural context and facilitate the 
preserv ation of  natural features and conserv ation of  the ex isting biodiversity. The sector also 
has the potential to improve the quality of life of the city’s residents, along with ensuring equity 
and inclusivity  in accessing various services and infrastructure. Figure 67 summarises  this 
approach.  
Figure 67: Approach to urban planning , greening , and biodiversity  
 
What are nature -based solutions (NBS)?  
 
Nature -based solutions are actions to protect, sustainably manage, or restore natural ecosystems, that 
address societal challenges such as climate change, human health, food and water security, and 
disaster risk reduction effectively and adaptively, simult aneously providing human well -being and 
biodiversity benefits. For example, a common problem is the flooding in coastal areas that occurs as a 
result of storm surges and coastal erosion. This challenge, traditionally tackled with manmade (grey) 
infrastruct ure such as sea walls or dikes, can also be addressed by actions that take advantage of 
ecosystem services such as tree planting.  Planting trees that thrive in coastal areas – known as 
mangroves - reduces the impact of storms on human lives and economic assets, and provides a habitat 
for fish, birds , and other plants , supporting biodiversity.  
 
Estimates suggest that nature -based solutions can provide  37% of the mitigation  needed until 2030 to 
achieve the targets of the Paris Agreement. How can this be done? If you plant trees, they’re going to 
soak up carbon. For example, restoring native forest s at the margins of the river to avoid landslides 
can also act as a carbon sink.  Climate -smart agriculture  is another example that enables farmers to 
retain more carbon in their fields as they produce crops. Decreasing deforestation is another way to 
benefit from nature -based solutions – for example, by paying farmers not to cut down the forest 
preserves ecosys tem services such as carbon sequestration, provision of clean drinking water, and 
reduction of river sedimentation downstream.  Climate Conscious
Facilitating GHG mitigation, 
increasing adaptation and 
building reslience towards 
various 
climate/environmental 
hazards faced by the city 
through urban planning and 
greening strategies  Nature Integrated
Integrating natural features 
into the urban planning 
processes through nature -
based solutions (NBS) and 
taking steps to conserve the 
city's biodiversity People Centric
Improving livability and 
promoting inclusivity through 
urban planning and 
greening measures
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   261  
Nature -based solutions also play a key role in climate change adaptation and building resilience in 
landscapes and communities.  Several nature -based solutions are being used by the World Bank to 
help manage disaster risk and reduce the incidence and impact of flooding, mudslides, and other 
disasters.  They are a cost -effective way of addressing climate change while also addressing 
biodiversity and land degradation. You can address several problems at once.  
But it’s not automatic that everything you plant becomes a nature -based solution that contributes to 
biodiversity – for example, planting trees that are not from the region and are toxic to local animals 
would not generate biodiversity benefits.  
 
Source: World Bank, 2022; What You Need to Know About Nature -Based Solutions to Climate Change  (C. 
Explainer 2022)  
 
 
Sectoral action tracks  
No. Action track  
UPGBD -1 Promote compact development through mixed use, walkable neighbourhoods . 
UPGBD -2 Develop climate -resilient and nature -integrated plans for the city and city-
region through participatory planning practices . 
UPGBD -3 Adopt nature -based solutions (NBS) as a n urban planning and design tool to 
improve resilience and liveability . 
UPGBD -4 Conserve, restore , and manage the city ’s biodiversity . 
UPGBD -5 Improve access to essential services and infrastructure, including safe and 
affordable housing for all . 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   262  
Track -wise actions  Priority  
S.No.  Actions  Aligned 
with 
(ongoing 
initiatives /oth
er actions)  Responsibl
e Agency  
Primary (P)  
Secondary (S)  Potential 
Source of 
funding  Output  Outcome  Co-benefit   
Timeline  
(Targeted year 
of completion 
of action)   
UPGBD -1: Promote compact development through mixed -use, walkable neighbourhoods connected by public transport . 
Goal/Target: Prepare and adopt the RMP 2041 and set up the Master Plan Coordination Committee by 2025 .  
UPGBD
-1.1 Revise the city's 
master plan based 
on compact 
development 
principles and 
incorporate 
provisions of the 
approved 
Bengaluru TOD 
Policy.  *Approved 
Bengaluru 
TOD Policy, 
BMLTA Bill, 
CMP 2020 
and Parking 
Policy 2.0  
* Pilot 
project 
planning for 
TOD and 
MMI along 
Phase 2A -2B 
metro 
corridor  
* RMP 2041 
under 
preparation  P: BDA  
 
S: 
BMLTA/D
ULT; all 
developme
nt, 
regulating, 
and 
sectoral/lin
e agencies 
concerned  BDA ’s 
own 
funds  Approved RMP 
2041; institutional 
set-up for master 
plan 
implementation + 
monitoring    a.  % increase in 
population with 
access to a public 
transport 
stop/station, 
public open space, 
primary 
education and 
healthcare facility 
within 10/12 -min 
walking distance.  
 
In TOD Zones 
(against baseline 
and non -TOD 
areas):  
b. % increase in 
street and NMT a. Improved 
accessibility, 
liveability  and 
resource 
efficiency  
b. Reduction in 
use of private 
vehicles and shift 
to PT and NMT 
modes  
c.  Reduction in 
vehicular fuel 
consumption, 
traffic congestion, 
air pollution , and 
crashes  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   263  
 
UPGB
D-1.2 Prepare and adopt 
the 'TOD Vision 
and Corridor Plan' 
and TOD Zone 
Plans (TZPs) for all 
stations along 
metro Phases 2A -
2B by 2025.  
 
Prepare and adopt 
TZPs for all mass 
transit stations in 
the city by 2035 
based on a TOD 
phasing strategy.    P: 
DULT/BM
LTA, BDA,  
 
S: BIAAPA, 
UDD, GoK , 
BBMP, 
BMRCL, 
KRIDE, 
BIAL, 
BMTC, 
KSRTC, 
BMRDA, 
BWSSB, 
BESCOM, 
KIADB, 
BTP  BMLTA/
UTIF 
Fund; 
planning 
and 
impleme
nting 
agency's 
own 
resource
s  a. No. of TOD 
Corridor and Zone 
Plans prepared and 
approved  
b. No. of public -
sector and private -
sector TOD 
schemes/projects 
approved and 
implemented  network density 
and connectivity.  
c. % increase in 
population and 
job densities  
d. % increase in 
affordable 
housing DUs 
(under 60 sqm)  2025  
(Prepare 
TOD 
Vision and 
Corridor 
Plan' and 
TOD Zone 
Plans 
[TZPs ] for 
metro 
corridors 
2A and 2B) 
 
2035  
(Prepare 
and adopt 
TZP for all 
transit 
stations)   
UPGB
D-1.3 Implement 
strategic public -
sector led TOD 
schemes and 
catalytic projects in 
a time -bound 
manner (based on 
TOD phasing 
strategy and plans).  
 
  2030; 
2035; 
2040  
(target  
years  to 
implement 
the 
projects)  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   264  
UPGBD -2: Develop climate -resilient and nature -integrated plans for the city and city -region through participatory planning practices . 
Goal/Target:  All spatial plans and DCRs to adopt climate action as a lens by 2030 .  
UPGB
D-2.1 Revise the 
Karnataka Town 
and Country 
Planning Act 
(KTCPA) to 
mandate land 
suitability based 
carrying capacity 
assessment and 
vulnerability 
assessment 
including climate 
parameters, along 
with the 
preparation of 
spatial master 
plans for all 
statutory towns.  In 
addition, a 
greenhouse gas 
inventory should 
be mandated for all 
Class 1 
towns/cities.  
Provisions for 
Town Planning 
Schemes (and 
Local Area Plans, if 
included) within 
the KTCPA should 
mandate an *The 
Karnataka 
Town and 
Country 
Planning 
(KTCP) Act, 
1961  P: DTCP  
 
S: UDD, 
GoK  GoK  a. Updated, revised 
and approved 
KTCP ACT  
b. No. of master  
plans 
revised/prepared 
based on suggested 
reforms and 
approved  
c. No. of TPS/LAPs 
prepared based on 
the suggested 
reforms and 
approved  
d. No. of Class 1 
towns/cities that 
have prepared a 
GHG inventory  a. Climate - and 
environment -
conscious master  
plans and TPS 
preparation 
process is 
institutionalised  a. Mitigation and 
management of 
adverse social 
and environment 
impacts  
b. Improved 
natural 
infrastructure 
management and 
resource 
efficiency  
c. Reduction in 
climate hazards 
and vulnerability  2026  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   265  
assessment of 
infrastructure 
carrying capacities 
and augmentation 
potential, 
environmental and 
social impacts of 
development 
proposals, along 
with appropriate 
management plans.   
UPGB
D-2.2 Revision of the 
BMRDA Structure 
Plan (RSP 2031) 
should align with 
the regional 
imperatives of 
CAP.  Revised 
Structure 
Plan 2031 
(RSP 2031) 
for 
Bengaluru 
Metropolitan 
Region, 
prepared 
under 
provisions of 
the BMRDA 
Act, 1985  P: BMRDA  
 
S: DTCP  BMRDA ’
s own 
funds  a. Revised BMRDA 
Structure Plan 
(with CAP 
imperatives ) a. Climate - and 
environment -
conscious 
regional planning 
in BMRDA area  2031  
 
UPGB
D-2.3 Create institutional 
mechanisms to 
address new forms 
of governance for 
managing regional 
growth and 
resource sheds.    P: GoK  
 
S: BMRDA, 
MPC  GoK        2028  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   266  
 
UPGB
D-2.4 The city's master 
plan revision 
should integrate 
economic 
development 
strategies for 
growth 
areas/corridors in 
the metropolitan 
area. Land use  
planning must 
protect natural 
infrastructure and 
demarcate 
ecologically  
sensitive areas.  *RMP 2041 
under 
preparation  P: BDA  
 
S: BMRDA, 
MPC, 
DTCP  BDA's 
own 
funds  a. Revised and 
approved master  
plan  
b. Clearly 
demarcated 
ecologically 
sensitive areas in 
the city  a. Climate - and 
environment -
conscious 
planned urban 
growth  
b. Sustainable 
economic 
development of 
the city 
c. Decrease in 
encroachment  of 
environmentally  
sensitive areas  a. Reduction in 
GHG emissions  
b. Increased 
resource 
efficiency  
c. Reduction in 
climate hazards 
and vulnerability  2025  
 
UPGB
D-2.5 Embed CAP 
imperatives into 
RMP urban design 
guidelines and ZRs.  *RMP 2041 
under 
preparation  P: BDA  
 
S: DTCP  BDA ’s 
own 
funds  a. Revised master  
plan ’s urban design 
guidelines and ZRs 
embedded with 
CAP imperatives  2025  
 
UPGB
D-2.6 All plan 
preparation, 
particularly at the 
local area/ward 
level, should 
ensure 
participation from 
the informal sector, 
and vulnerable and 
marginalised 
communities.  *RMP 2041 
under 
preparation  
* Approved 
Bengaluru 
TOD Policy 
and Pilot 
TZPs 
preparation  P: BDA, 
BBMP  
 
S: All 
developme
nt, 
regulating, 
and 
sectoral/lin
e agencies  
concerned   Own 
funds of 
all 
agencies 
concern
ed  a. No. of public 
discussions and 
citizens ’ 
consultations held  
b. No. of 
discussions/consul
tations specifically 
including informal 
sector workers, and 
vulnerable and 
marginalised 
groups ’ 
representatives  a. Better 
understanding of 
ground -level 
issues, challenges 
and opportunities  
b. Bottom -up 
participatory 
planning 
processes are 
institutionalised  a. Amplified 
public voice in 
plan -making, 
better 
acceptability and 
ownership of 
plans among st 
citizens  
b. Improved 
transparency, 
accountability , 
and trust  (As per the 
timelines 
of the 
plans)  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   267  
 
UPGB
D-2.7 Create an 
integrated spatial 
database for the 
city, which is 
periodically 
updated , and make 
it publicly  
accessible through 
a dashboard.  * RMP 2041 
under 
preparation  
* Pilot 
project for 
TOD and 
MMI 
planning 
along Metro 
Phases 2A -
2B corridor  
* BBMP's 
location -
based 
dashboard, 
ward level 
information  P: KSRSAC  
 
S: All 
developme
nt, 
regulating, 
and 
sectoral/lin
e agencies 
concerned  GoK  a. Integrated 
spatial database is 
prepared, regularly 
updated , and 
dashboard is 
accessible  to public  a. Better  
visualisation of 
existing  status 
and issues at 
different scales  
b. Informed 
decision -making 
by public and 
private 
stakeholders  
c. Improved co -
ordination in 
planning and 
implementation 
among st 
stakeholder 
agencies  
d. Efficient 
monitoring and 
evaluation  a. Improved 
transparency, 
accountability,  
and trust  2025  
 
UPGB
D-2.8 Ensure stringent 
enforcement of all 
plans, revised  to 
accommodate  CAP 
imperatives. 
Strengthen  review 
and monitoring 
systems for all 
schemes/projects 
(at approval and 
implementation 
stages), through 
the integrated 
spatial database   P: BDA, 
BBMP  
 
S: 
Departmen
t of 
Personnel 
and 
Administra
tive 
Reforms  
(DPAR ) Own 
funds of 
all 
agencies  
concern
ed a. Strict 
enforcement of 
revised master  
plan , structure 
plan, TZPs  
b. Reduction in the 
no. of building 
violations and non -
adherence  issues 
from approved 
schemes/projects  
c. Updated 
integrated spatial 
database  a. Environment - 
and climate -
conscious  
planned urban 
growth  
b. Sustainable 
economic 
development of 
the city  
c. Decrease in 
encroachments  of 
environmentally 
sensitive areas  
d. Efficient a. Resource 
efficiency  
b. Increased 
economic growth  
c. Reduction in 
climate hazards  
d. Reduction in 
GHG emissions  2025 -2050  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   268  
and e -governance 
measures.  project 
monitoring and 
evaluation, 
leading to 
efficient decision 
making  
e. Adoption of e -
governance 
measures for 
review and 
monitoring  
f. Effective plan 
implementation/ 
enforcement   
  
UPGBD -3: Adopt nature -based solutions (NBS)  as a n urban planning and design tool to improve resilience and liveability . 
Goal/Target: Conserve and restore all blue -green networks in the city. All urban infrastructure schemes and projects should adhere to disaster resilience 
standards.  
 Increase the city’s tree cover (canopy) from the baseline by 10% by 2030 and 20% by 2040.  
 Increase the city’s green (vegetation) cover and permeable surface s to 40% of the city ’s area by 2040, to tackle flood - and heat -related disaster risk 
reduction.  
 Convert 75% of the city’s footpaths to permeable surface material by 2050 .  
UPGB
D-3.1 Create a Blue -
Green Policy  for 
BUD . It should 
incorporate  
strategies and 
guidelines for 
public streets and 
spaces, eco -
mobility/recreation 
networks, 
sustainable urban 
drainage systems ,   P: BMRDA  
 
S: Local 
Planning 
Area 
Authorities 
within 
BMR, 
Forest 
Departmen
t (BUD), GoK, 
BMRDA'
s own 
funds  a. Blue -Green 
Policy for 
Bengaluru Urban 
District is prepared  a. Restoration and 
enhancement  of 
blue -green 
networks, city 
streets and 
spaces.  
b. % of street 
network 
integrated with 
NBS  
c. No. of public 
spaces integrated a. Reduction in 
total GHG 
emissions and air 
pollution  
b. Improved 
environmental 
and public health  2026  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   269  
and the built 
environment. 
Integrate NBS 
within long -term 
disaster risk 
management and 
prevention 
protocols.  BBMP, 
UDD  with NBS  
d. Reduction in 
the impacts of 
climate related 
hazards and 
vulnerability  
  UPGB
D-3.1a Spatial master 
plans or working 
plans of various 
local 
authorities/depart
ments should 
incorporate Blue -
Green Policy 
imperatives.  Aligned with 
action no. 
UPGBD -3.1  P: Local 
Planning 
Area 
Authorities 
within 
BMR,  
 
S: UDD , 
Forest 
Departmen
t (BUD), 
BBMP  Agenc ies
’ own 
funds  Spatial master 
plans and 
department 
working plans 
incorporate Blue -
Green policy 
imperatives  2025 -2030  
 
UPGB
D-3.2 Complete the 
ongoing Tree 
Census exercise in 
the city by 2025 
and update 
periodically.    P: BBMP  
 
S: Forest 
Departmen
t (BUD)  BBMP ’s 
own 
funds, 
NCAP 
grants  a. Comprehensive 
and updated Tree 
Census for 
Bengaluru is 
prepared  a. % change in 
number of trees/ 
tree cover (carbon 
sinks)  
b. % change in 
native species  a. Increased 
awareness on 
need for 
conservation and 
enhancement of 
tree cover  
b. Reduction in 
total GHG 
emissions  
c. Reduction in 
climate hazards 
and vulnerability  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   270  
 
UPGB
D-3.3 Map the city's blue -
green cover, 
including natural 
drainage, water 
bodies , floodplains, 
trees outside 
forests (TOF), etc ., 
to create a baseline 
and integrate into 
the city's spatial 
database to 
facilitate regular 
updating .  Aligned with 
action no. 
UPGBD -2.7 
(Integrated 
Spatial 
Database)  P: KSRSAC  
 
S: BBMP, 
BDA, 
Forest 
Departmen
t (BUD), 
KLCDA, 
Revenue 
Departmen
t Agency ’s 
own 
funds, 
GoK  a. Integrated 
spatial database 
with specific layers 
on various natural 
features and types 
of blue -green cover  a. Informed 
decision -making 
by public and 
private 
stakeholders  
b. Co-ordinated 
planning and 
implementation 
among st 
stakeholder 
agencies  
c. Effective 
monitoring and 
evaluation  
d. No. of types of 
natural assets 
conserved and 
restored  a. Increased 
awareness on 
need for 
conservation of 
natural 
infrastructure.  
b. Improved 
transparency, 
participation, 
accountability 
and trust  
c. Reduction in 
total GHG 
emissions  
d. Reduction in 
climate hazards 
and vulnerability  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   271  
 
UPGB
D-3.4 Adopt changes to 
DCRs/Building 
Bye-laws to 
incorporate NBS 
and hybrid 
infrastructure to 
increase permeable 
areas (for instance, 
reserved area for 
parks/open 
spaces) , and 
incentivise them.  * Aligned 
with action 
no. UPGBD -
2.5  
* RMP 2041 
under 
preparation  
* BBMP 
Building 
Bye-laws 
2003  P: BDA, 
BBMP  
 
S: All 
developme
nt, 
regulating, 
and 
sectoral/lin
e agencies 
concerned  Agenc ies
’ own 
funds  a. Revised DCRs 
and Building Bye -
laws incorporating 
NBS  a. Volume of 
water retention 
capacity created 
(cu. m.)  
b. % increase in 
permeable surface 
area and recharge 
potential  
c. Volume of 
collected 
rainwater 
available ( cu. m. ) 
d. Decrease in % 
of heavy rainfall 
events leading to 
flooding  
e. % of vulnerable 
areas covered by 
NBS  
f. Temperature 
difference/ 
reduction 
between 
permeable and 
non-permeable 
areas  
g. % 
change/increase 
in public open 
spaces  a. Reduction in 
total GHG 
emissions  
b. Reduction in 
air pollution  
c. Reduction in 
climate hazards 
and vulnerability, 
especially in low -
income 
neighbourhoods  2025  
 
UPGB
D-3.5 Prepare and adopt 
public works 
(engineering) 
standards and 
SOPs to 
incorporate NBS 
and hybrid 
infrastructure 
requirements, 
including for low -
income 
neighbourhoods.    P: BBMP  
 
S: PWD , 
BDA  Agenc ies
’ own 
funds, 
GoK, 
NCAP 
grants, 
PPP  a. Public  
works/engineering 
standards and 
SOPs incorporat ing 
NBS  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   272  
 
UPGB
D-3.6 Undertake 
conversion of 
footpaths and on -
street parking 
spaces to 
permeable surface 
material.  *Aligned 
with  action 
no. UPGBD -
3.5; 
*TenderSU R
E road 
standards  P: BBMP  
 
S: PWD , 
BDA  Agenc ies
’ own 
funds, 
GoK, 
PPP  a. % footpaths ( km) 
and on -street 
parking spaces (sq . 
m.) converted to 
permeable 
surfaces.  2024 to 
2040  
 
UPGB
D-3.7 Prepare and adopt 
a greening 
guideline  for the 
city with a list of 
suggested species , 
based on context 
and planting area . 
Compensatory 
greening initiatives 
should also refer to 
this.    P: BBMP,  
 
S: KBB , 
Forest 
Departmen
t (BUD)  Agenc ies
’ own 
funds, 
GoK, 
NCAP 
grants , 
PPP  a. 'Greening 
Guidelines 
approved  a. % increase in 
green cover, tree 
cover  
b. % increase in 
plantation area 
with native 
species , and 
reduction in non -
native  
c. % increase in 
number of native 
trees, captured 
through the Tree 
Census  
d. % target 
achieved for 
urban greening 
sector  2025  
 
UPGB
D-3.8 Identify 
neighbourhoods, 
streets, 
public/semi -public 
and private spaces 
to take up suitable 
NBS initiatives, 
through a 
participatory *Aligned 
with a ction 
No. UPGBD -
2.7 
(integrated 
spatial 
database)  
*CCRA -VA 
Analysis  P: BBMP,  
 
S: BDA, 
KSRSAC , 
Forest 
Departmen
t (BUD)   Agenc ies
’ own 
funds, 
NCAP 
grants , 
funds 
under 
greening 
schemes a. Total area 
identified for NBS 
initiatives  
b. No. of 
stakeholder 
consultations 
conducted to 
identify spaces for 
NBS initiatives  a. % increase in 
green cover  
b. % increase in 
tree (canopy) 
cover (in sqm.)  
c. % increase in 
blue cover  
d.  % increase in 
permeable 2024 -2030  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   273  
process. This can 
be informed by the 
CCRA (including 
VA) to ensure 
targeted action in 
high -risk locations.  
Demarcate 
identified areas in 
the city's spatial 
database and track 
ongoing initiatives.  (GUA, 
AOA, 
RSP 
schemes
), PPP 
and 
other 
innovati
ve 
mechani
sms.  c. Periodic 
updating  of city's 
integrated spatial 
database with 
identified areas for 
NBS initiatives  surfaces  
e. % of population 
within 15 minutes 
from green cover 
(disaggregated)  
 
UPGB
D-3.9 Define 
implementation 
and funding 
mechanisms for 
these NBS 
initiatives, for e.g., 
PPP, link to 
compensatory 
greening, etc. 
Identify 
government 
funding sources 
(budget 
allocations) and 
other innovative 
financing such as 
green bonds and 
CSR.  *Aligned 
with a ction 
No. UPGBD -
3.8 (NBS 
activities)  P: BBMP,  
 
S: BDA, 
EMPRI, 
GoK , Forest 
Departmen
t (BUD)  Agenc ies
’ own 
funds, 
NCAP 
grants , 
funds 
under 
greening 
schemes 
(GUA, 
AOA, 
RSP 
schemes
), PPP 
and 
other 
innovati
ve 
mechani
sms.  a. Implementation 
and financing 
strategy and 
mechanisms are 
defined  
b. No. of existing  
and 
new/innovative 
funding sources 
identified for NBS 
initiatives  
c. Total funds 
available for NBS 
initiatives  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   274  
 
UPGB
D-3.10  Design an urban 
employment 
scheme  with a 
three -pronged 
objective of 
economic 
development, 
ecological/biodiver
sity protection, and 
employment 
generation. This 
can include 
cleaning and 
maintenance of 
water bodies  and 
drains, tending 
urban greens, 
urban agriculture, 
environmental 
mapping and 
monitoring, etc)  Deendayal 
Antyodaya 
Yojana -
National 
Urban 
Livelihoods 
Mission 
(DAY -
NULM) ; 
Self-
employment  
Scheme of 
KMDC; 
proposed 
National 
Urban 
Employment 
Guarantee 
Scheme  P: GoK  
 
S: BBMP, 
Forest 
Departmen
t (BUD), 
UDD  GoK, 
Agenc ies
’ own 
funds  a. Urban 
Employment  
Scheme is prepared 
and approved  
b. No. of green jobs 
created  
c. No. of people 
employed for green 
jobs through this 
scheme  a. % increase in 
incomes from 
green jobs  
b. Improved 
quantity and 
quality of blue -
green 
infrastructure  a. Increase in 
employment/livel
ihood 
opportunities  
b. Improved 
biodiversity and 
other ecosystem 
services  
c. Reduction in 
climate hazards 
and vulnerability  2026  
 
UPGB
D-3.11 Promote 
participatory 
processes for 
planning and 
implementing NBS 
in the city. Take up 
IEC campaigns to 
elicit local 
participation.  *Aligned 
with a ction 
No. UPGBD -
3.8 (NBS 
activities)  P: BBMP.  
 
S: EMPRI , 
Forest 
Departmen
t (BUD)  Agenc ies
’ own 
funds, 
NCAP 
grants  a. IEC 
materials/toolkits 
prepared  
b. No. of IEC 
sessions/activities 
conducted  a. % increase in 
green cover  
b. % increase in 
tree (canopy) 
cover (in sq . m) 
c. % increase in 
blue cover  
d. % increase in 
permeable 
surfaces  a. Reduction in 
total GHG 
emissions  
b. Reduction in 
air pollution  
c. Reduction in 
climate hazards 
and vulnerability  2025 
onwards  
 
UPGB
D-3.12  Conduct capacity -
building activities 
for: *Aligned 
with a ction 
No. UPGBD -P: BBMP,  
 Agencies
’ own 
funds, a. No. of capacity -
building workshops 
conducted  a. Increase in 
budget allocation 
for NBS initiatives  2025 
onwards  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   275  
(a) Actors involved 
in NBS initiatives, 
to promote 
scientific approach 
towards 
implementation 
and maintenance  
(b) Sensitise and 
empower officials 
to case -build for 
adequate budget 
from diverse 
sources for NBS 
initiatives  3.8 (NBS 
activities)  S: EMPRI , 
Forest 
Departmen
t (BUD)   NCAP 
grants  b. No. of people 
(including officials) 
trained  b. Increase in 
number of NBS 
initiatives 
approved and 
implemented  
c. % increase in 
permeable 
surfaces, tree 
canopy, green and 
blue cover  
UPGBD -4: Conserve, restore , and manage the city's biodiversity .  
Goal/Target: Operationalise the (recently re -constituted) BMC by 2023 and prepare the People ’s Biodiversity Register by 2025 .  
UPGB
D-4.1 As per the 
Biological Diversity 
Act, 2002  
and Karnataka 
Biological Diversity 
Rules 2005:  
1) Ensure 
functionality of the 
Biodiversity 
Management 
Committee (BMC) 
within the BBMP 
by providing them 
a conducive 
ecosystem 
(funds/ functionari
es).  
2) Prepare the Biological 
Diversity Act, 
2002  
and 
Karnataka 
Biological 
Diversity 
Rules 2005  P: BBMP - 
BMC (for 
preparation 
of PBR and 
setting up 
of fund)  
 
S: Forest 
Departmen
t (BUD), 
KBB - 
technical 
support 
and 
guidance 
for 
preparation 
of PBR  Agencies
’ own 
funds; 
instituti
onal  
grants; 
CSR; 
GoK  a. Rules and S OPs 
for BMC 
established  
b. No. of 
stakeholder/citizen 
engagement  
sessions conducted  
c. PBR prepared, 
shared publicly , 
and periodically 
updated  
d. Biodiversity 
Fund set  up for the 
city/district  a. Improved local 
biodiversity 
(species) and 
other ecosystem 
services  
b. Active 
involvement of 
citizens  a. Increased 
adaptive capacity 
and resilience in 
the face of  climate 
hazards  2024 (1); 
2026 (2  
and 3) 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   276  
People's 
Biodiversity 
Register (PBR)  
through a multi -
stakeholder 
participatory 
process at the zone 
level (8 BBMP 
Zones) and update 
it periodically.  
3) Set up a Local 
Biodiversity Fund.   
UPGB
D-4.2 Develop a Local 
Biodiversity 
Strategy and  
Action Plan 
(LBSAP). Apart 
from ecological, 
cultural, 
recreational , and 
aesthetic  aspects, it 
should consider 
biodiversity from a 
livelihood lens.  Biological 
Diversity Act, 
2002 , 
and 
Karnataka 
Biological 
Diversity 
Rules 2005  P: BBMP - 
BMC  
 
S: Forest 
Departmen
t (BUD), 
KBB - 
technical 
support  Agencies
’ own 
funds; 
instituti
onal  
grants; 
CSR; 
GoK  a. Strategic Action 
Plan for 
conserving, 
restoring , and 
managing city's 
biodiversity  
prepared  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   277  
 
UPGB
D-4.3 Prepare a City 
Biodiversity Index 
and make it 
publicly available. 
As part of the 
index , spatially 
map biodiversity 
hotspots and 
habitat 
degradation. 
Develop a mobile 
application and QR 
code -based toolkit 
for interactive 
biodiversity 
conservation and 
management.  Biological 
Diversity Act, 
2002 , 
and 
Karnataka 
Biological 
Diversity 
Rules 2005  P: BBMP - 
BMC  
 
S: Forest 
Departmen
t (BUD), 
KBB  - 
technical 
support  Agencies
’ own 
funds; 
instituti
onal  
grants; 
CSR; 
GoK  a. City Biodiversity 
Index prepared, 
shared publicly , 
and periodically 
updated  2026  
UPGBD -5: Improve access to essential services and infrastructure, including safe and affordable housing for all . 
Goal/Target:   By 2050, provide safe and affordable housing for 100% urban poor and vulnerable groups in locations having access to public t ransport 
stops/stations within a 5 -minute walk . 
 By 2050, increase the city’s publicly accessible per capita open space from the existing 2.2 sq . m to 6 sq . m.    
UPGB
D-5.1 Identify and 
demarcate safe and 
accessible 
affordable housing 
locations (land use 
zones and public 
land parcels) for 
the urban poor 
(EWS -LIG) in the 
city’s master plan.  *RMP 2041 
under 
preparation  
*CCRA -VA 
Analysis  P: BDA,  
 
S: BBMP, 
KSDB, 
KHB , 
KSRSAC  Agencies
’ own 
funds  a. RMP 2041 
demarcates safe 
and accessible 
locations for 
affordable housing  a. Increase in 
adaptive capacity 
and resilience of 
urban poor 
households 
towards climate 
hazards and 
vulnerabilities.  
b. Improved 
quality of life a. Resource 
efficiency  
b. Reduction in 
economic costs 
due to 
hazard/disaster -
related loss of life 
and damage to 
property, 
particularly for 2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   278  
 
UPGB
D-5.2 Based on the 
CCRA -VA, identify 
and prioritise 
slums and other 
low-income 
settlements for 
targeted action. 
Prepare a strategy 
for climate -
proofing and 
improving 
resilience in these 
settlements, 
including 
appropriate 
retrofit ting and 
upgrad es (low -cost 
NBS), in situ  
redevelopment, 
disaster 
management and 
response facilities , 
etc.  
Illegal/unauthorise
d slum and 
squatter 
settlements in 
demarcated no -
development buffer 
zones and high -risk 
locations should be 
rehabilitated in 
safe and accessible 
affordable housing * Aligned 
with Action 
Track 3 of 
UPGBD  
(Action no. 
UPGBD -3.4, 
3.5 and 3.8)  
* CCRA -VA 
analysis  P: BBMP  
 
S: KSDB, 
KHB, BDA, 
KSNDMC, 
KSRSAC  Agencies
’ own 
funds, 
GoK - 
various 
urban 
housing 
schemes  a. Slums, low -
income settlements 
in hazard -
vulnerable 
locations identified 
and notified for 
improvement 
schemes  
b. Climate -proofing 
strategies for 
hazard -resilient, 
affordable housing 
for the urban poor 
defined.  conditions for 
urban poor 
households  urban poor 
households and 
government  
agencies  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   279  
locations 
(identified above).  
 
UPGB
D-5.3 Remove 
illegal/unauthorise
d developments in 
demarcated no -
development zones 
(ecologically 
sensitive areas, 
buffers and other 
high -risk 
locations).  Connected to 
demarcation 
of 
ecologically -
sensitive/ 
buffer areas 
and stringent 
enforcement 
points above, 
and 5.2 
(Identificatio
n of high -risk 
locations ) 
 
  P: BBMP, 
BDA  
 
S: Police 
Departmen
t Agencies
’ own 
funds  a. Reclamation of 
illegally 
encroached areas  a. % increase in 
ecologically 
sensitive/buffer 
areas conserved 
and restored  
b. % decrease in 
population 
adversely affected 
due to climate 
hazards  a. Increase in 
green and blue 
cover  
b. Reduction in 
climate hazards 
and 
vulnerabilities  
c. Reduction in 
total GHG 
emissions  2035  
 
UPGB
D-5.4 Ensure access to 
mass transit 
stations, public 
open spaces, daily 
need s markets, 
primary education , 
and healthcare * RMP 2041 
under 
preparation  
* Approved 
Bengaluru 
TOD Policy  
* Disaster P: BDA  
 
S: BBMP, 
BMRDA  Agencies
’ own 
funds  a. Spatial plans 
include enabling 
proposals and 
regulations to 
improve access to 
basic infrastructure 
for all - based on a a. % of population 
having access to 
amenities/service
s within a 15 -
minute walk ing 
distance  
b. Reduction in a. Reduction in 
GHG emissions 
and air pollution  
b. Increase in 
resilience and 
adaptive capacity 
in the face of  2025 -2040  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   280  
facilities within a 
15-minute walking 
distance for 100% 
of the population. 
Promote this 
through spatial 
plans and DCRs.  Resilience 
Actions  mapping and 
assessment of 
current 
accessibility levels.  number of trips, 
trip distances and 
vehicle km 
travelled   climate hazards 
and vulnerability  
 
UPGB
D-5.5 Mandate adoption 
of universal 
accessibility 
standards in urban 
design (public 
streets, spaces) 
guidelines and 
development 
regulations.  * 
TenderSURE 
guidelines  
* DULT's 
policies and 
guidelines 
for TOD, 
NMT, 
pedestrian 
infrastructur
e, road 
safety , Draft 
Active 
Mobility Bill , 
etc. P: BBMP, 
DULT  
 
S: BDA, 
PWD  Agencies
’ own 
funds  a. Design 
guidelines and 
development 
regulations 
mandate  adher ence 
to universal 
accessibility 
standards  a. % of public 
streets and 
spaces, public 
transport facilities 
and buildings that 
are universally 
accessible  
b. Services, 
infrastructur e, 
and amenities 
accessible to all 
irrespective of 
age/ability/gende
r a. Inclusive 
development  
b. Improved 
liveability   
c. Increase in 
resilience and 
adaptive capacity 
towards climate 
hazards and 
vulnerability  2026  
 
UPGB
D-5.6 Recogn ise urban 
ecosystems (water -
bodies, green 
spaces, etc.) as  
'urban 
commons'  and 
allow local 
communities to 
access them for 
their livelihoods 
and subsistence, 
apart from *Aligned 
with a ction 
No. UPGBD -
3.1 (Blue -
Green Policy)  P: BBMP  
 
S: KLCDA, 
BDA, 
Forest 
Departmen
t, GoK  Agencies
’ own 
funds  a. Guidelines for 
inclusive design 
and access to urban 
commons and 
ecosystem services 
defined within the 
Blue -Green Policy  
b. No. of IEC 
sessions conducted 
to spread 
awareness  a. Improved 
access to public 
open spaces and 
commons  
b. % increase in 
per capita public 
open space  
c. % of population 
within 15  minutes’ 
walking distance 
from public open 
spaces 2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   281  
recreation/leisure 
and educational 
purposes.  (disaggregated by 
income level)  
 
UPGB
D-5.7 Map, plan , and 
provide public 
open spaces based 
on the demand and 
availability gap 
analysis for 
equitable 
distribution of 
open spaces.  *RMP 2041 
under 
preparation  
* Approved 
TOD Policy  P: BDA, 
BBMP  
 
S: Forest 
Departmen
t, 
public/ semi
-public 
institutions  Agencies
’ own 
funds, 
PPP  a. Mapping of 
public open spaces 
and civic amenity 
sites integrated 
into the spatial 
database and 
periodically 
updated  
b. Appropriate 
proposals and 
regulations for 
creation and 
equitable  
distribution of 
public open spaces 
incorporated into 
spatial statutory 
plans.  2025 -2040  
 
 
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   282  
5.3.7  Disaster management    
Approach  
Climate change is a global phenomenon,  and its impacts are being seen across the world at 
multiple levels. The city of Bengaluru is no different , and a detailed report on the climate and 
environmental hazards the city could potentially  be subject to has been elaborated in a 
separate document , i.e., the Climate Change Risk and Vulnerability Assessment. Recent trends 
in the city suggest an increase in occurrences of hazards both in terms of intensity and 
frequency. This is exacerbated by Bengaluru’s ever -increasing population as more and more 
people migrat e to the city for better opportunities and a higher standard of living.  
The primary approach towards identifying  action tracks and actions for the sector is a four -
pronged approach  (refer Figure 68), i.e., robust data -backed statutory preparedness , a 
comprehensive planning document along with prompt rescue and relief operations, followed 
by faster recovery after  a disaster , and building a climate resilient city  by disaster risk 
reduction as per the Se ndai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction. The action tracks and 
actions have been listed in the table  below,  keeping the above -mentioned factors as the 
primary premise.  
Figure 68: Approach for disaster risk reduction  
 
Sectoral action tracks  
No. Action track  
DM- 1 Create a comprehensive spatio -temporal database pertaining to climate hazards, impacts, 
and vulnerabilities . 
DM-2  Create a robust policy framework for disaster management including policies for addressing 
loss and damage from  climate and environmental hazards . 
DM-3  Empower citizens, civil society , and local platforms to adopt a decentral ised and inclusive 
approach towards DRR . 
DM-4  Enhance ecosystem capacity to reduce disaster risk through faster and better response . Preparedness
Data -backed better 
awareness and 
warning systems Response and 
Relief
Well planned 
statutory document 
and capacity -
building for prompt 
actionRecovery 
mechanisms
Adequate post -
disaster planning 
and supportRisk Redcution 
Strategies for future
Emphasis on 
building a climate -
resilient city
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   283  
Track -wise actions   Priority  
S.No  Actions  Aligned with 
(ongoing 
initiatives/other 
actions)  Responsible 
Agency  
Primary (P)  
Secondary (S ) Potential 
Source of 
funding  Output  Outcome  Co-benefit  Timeline  
(Targeted 
year of 
completion 
of action)  
DM- 1: Create a comprehensive spatio -temporal database pertaining to climate hazards, impacts,  and vulnerabilities . 
Goal/Target: A comprehensive and regularly updated data repository for the city .  
DM
- 
1.1. Assess available datasets 
pertaining to climate and 
environmental hazards, identify 
gaps , and create a list of the 
complete repository of datasets 
needed for a comprehensive city -
level database.   a. Forecasting 
and early 
warning 
systems as per  
National 
Disaster 
Management 
Policy.  
b. KSNDMC 
and KSRSACs 
data -driven 
exercises 
towards 
comprehensive 
state -level data 
availability  P: BBMP  
 
S: BUD, 
KSNDMC , 
and 
KSRSAC  Included in 
the budget of 
National 
Data 
Governance 
Policy  
 
State Budget 
for 
Bengaluru  
city 
 
BBMP 
budget  Creation of a 
data 
repository 
along with 
spatial maps 
of disaster 
occurrence  Better 
preparednes
s for future 
disasters  Reduction in 
loss and 
damage 
during 
disasters  2024  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   284  
  DM
- 
1.2 Prepare a comprehensive city-level 
database that is regularly updated 
and that comes under the purview 
of a unified body. It should 
include:  
 
- Climate datasets including  
temperature, precipitation, 
humidity, windspeed , etc.  
- Data -sets on hazard occurrence  
history and its impact , including 
loss and damage of lives, 
livelihoods , and economy  
- Systemic evaluation and 
recording of the social, health, 
environmental , and economic 
impacts of the disaster  
- Datasets on demograph ics and 
the socio -economic scenario, 
migrant population, gig workers , 
etc.  
- Encourage the use of technology 
to crowdsource data on disasters  a. KSNDMCs 
current data -
driven exercise 
on climate -
related 
datasets as per 
the Karnataka 
State Disaster 
Management 
Plan 2020 -21 
b. Other 
datasets to be 
included as 
needed in the 
city-level 
action plan  P: BBMP  
 
S: BUD, 
KSNDMC , 
and 
KSRSAC  Included in 
the budget 
under the  
National 
Data 
Governance 
Policy  
 
State budget 
for 
Bengaluru  
city 
 
BBMP 
budget  Creation of a 
data 
repository , 
along with 
spatial maps 
of disaster 
occurrence  Better 
preparednes
s for future 
disasters  Reduction in 
loss and 
damage 
during 
disasters  2025  
  DM
- 
1.3 Conduct yearly detailed 
assessment s of loss and damage 
from all types of disasters 
occurring  in the city. This should 
include datasets on :  
 
- Loss of lives/fatalities due to 
disasters  
- Injuries/ health impacts that can 
be attributed to disasters  
- Economic loss due to disasters. a. Aligned with 
different 
sector action 
tracks , 
including 
energy, 
transport, 
water and 
wastewater, 
solid waste 
management, P: BBMP  
 
S: BUD, 
KSNDMC, 
KSDMA , 
and other 
sector -
specific 
department
, including 
the Health Included in 
the budget of 
National 
Data 
Governance 
Policy  
 
State Budget 
for 
Bengaluru  
city Creation of a 
data 
repository of 
loss and 
damage 
occurrence 
due to 
disasters  Better 
preparednes
s for future 
disasters  Reduction in 
loss and 
damage 
during 
disasters  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   285  
This should also include loss of 
livelihoods of vulnerable 
communities and migrant workers  
- Loss of assets and infrastructure 
including  electric poles, water , 
water lines , etc., as well as  
individual loss of  property , due to 
disasters  
- Tree fall and loss of other green 
cover  urban 
planning, 
greening , and 
biodiversity .  Departmen
t  
BBMP 
budget  
  DM
- 
1.4 Spatial mapping of access to basic 
services within the city : 
 
Spatial mapping of natural 
network  and, networked 
infrastructure such as  the 
capacities of storm water drains in 
the city. This could be a data -
based approach taking into 
account  past rainfall trends, 
vulnerable locations, natural 
topography , etc.  P: BBMP  
 
S: BUD, 
KSNDMC , 
and 
KSRSAC  Included in 
the budget of 
National 
Data 
Governance 
Policy  
 
State budget 
for 
Bengaluru  
city 
 
BBMP 
budget  Creation of a 
data 
repository 
along with 
spatial maps 
of disaster 
occurrence  Better 
preparednes
s for future 
disasters  Reduction in 
loss and 
damage 
during 
disasters  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   286  
 
DM
- 1.5 Regular update of the CCRA -VA 
document once in two years , 
including : 
  
- Spatio -temporal mapping of 
existing disasters , along with 
projections for the near future , on 
a regular basis ,  especially  when 
there is an expected rise in 
occurrences  of a particular disaster  
 
- Spatial mapping of specific 
vulnerable communities will give a 
glimpse of those that are more 
vulnerable than others.  
 
- Spatial mapping of locations of 
informal settlements, migrant 
workers, gig workers , etc.    P: BBMP  
 
S: BUD, 
KSNDMC 
and 
KSRSAC  Included in 
the budget of 
National 
Data 
Governance 
Policy  
 
State budget 
for 
Bengaluru  
city 
 
BBMP 
budget  Regularly 
updated 
CCRAVA CCR
A-VA 
document  Better 
preparednes
s for future 
disasters  Loss and 
damage 
reduction  2025  
 
DM
- 
1.6 Create a citizen -faced disaster 
dissemination  information system 
with a multi -pronged approach. In 
addition to  available systems, this 
could be achieved by  exploring the 
use of existing PIS systems and 
other outreach mediums in a more 
efficient manner to enhance the 
reach of the information itself.  a. Existing 
mobile 
application 
called Megha 
Sandesha , 
which  gives 
real-time local 
weather 
conditions , 
including  the 
possible 
occurrence of 
disasters  
b. Call centre 
called Varuna P: BBMP  
 
S: BUD, 
KSNDMC , 
and 
KSDMA  Included in 
the budget of 
National 
Data 
Governance 
Policy  
 
State budget 
for 
Bengaluru  
city 
 
BBMP 
budget  An effective , 
inclusive , 
and equitable 
disaster 
disseminatio
n system  Greater 
awareness 
about  
disasters and 
their  
occurrence , 
across all 
social groups  Loss and 
damage 
reduction  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   287  
Mitra , which  
also gives this 
information  
c. Other PIS 
systems of 
other agencies  
DM- 2: Create a robust policy framework for Disaster Management including policies for addressing loss and damage from climate and environmental 
hazards . 
Goal/Target: A comprehensive disaster management plan.    
DM
- 
2.1 Frame a robust city-level policy 
framework in the form of a 
Disaster Management Plan to 
strengthen disaster risk 
governance for prevention, 
mitigation, preparedness, 
response, recovery , and 
rehabilitation. The plan should 
incorporate the key findings from 
CCRA -VA with regular updates , 
with every new iteration of the 
CCRA -VA document.  a. National 
Disaster 
Management 
Act   
b. Karnataka 
State Disaster 
Management 
Plan  P: BBMP  
 
S: BUD, 
KSNDMC , 
and 
KSDMA  BBMP 
budget  A robust 
planning 
system in 
place during 
disasters for 
better 
preparedness
, and prompt 
action at all 
levels  Enhance men
t of the city's 
planning 
systems for 
prompt 
action  Reduction in 
loss and 
damage 
during 
disasters  2024  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   288  
 
DM
- 
2.2 Develop  a Disaster Risk Reduction 
Plan that would enhance the city’s 
long -term resilience using the 
principles of  the Sendai 
framework. This is in addition to 
the Disaster Management Plan 
that the city would have. This 
should ideally include the 
following:  
 
-Frame a multi -hazard -level plan 
for the city , incorporating findings 
from the CCRA -VA document  
 
-Establish a mechanism for a well -
coordinated system across line 
departments at the ward/zonal 
level for disaster preparedness and 
disaster response  
 
-Conduct a de tailed assessment of 
the impact on mobility of various  
groups of people during disasters , 
and impact on access to services 
and opportunities. Sector plans for 
infrastructure and mobility to be 
informed by this plan ( see 2.3) 
 
-Develop and strengthen  a 
mechanism to protect livelihoods 
and assets of individuals, 
especially of those from lower 
socio -economic strata and low-
income groups.  a. Karnataka 
State Disaster 
Management 
Plan  P: BBMP  
 
S: BUD, 
KSNDMC 
and 
KSDMA  BBMP 
budget  
 
Infrastructur
e for disaster 
management  A city-level 
planning 
system to 
enhance the 
resilience  of 
people, 
infrastructur
e and the 
economy  Enhance d 
the city’s  
resilience to 
disasters  Reduction in 
loss and 
damage 
during 
disasters  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   289  
 
-Partner with local organisations 
and citizen -level initiatives to 
build individual and community 
resilience  capacities  
 
-Streamline the mechanism for 
post -disaster recovery activities 
including faster disbursement of 
funds . 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   290  
 
DM
- 
2.3 Incorporate Disaster Risk 
Reduction Planning in the 
planning, operation , and 
management of various  sectors 
such as  energy ; water supply ; 
wastewater management ; 
transport ; solid waste ; and  urban 
planning, greening and 
biodiversity . Aligned with 
different 
sector action 
tracks , 
including 
energy ; 
transport ; 
water and 
wastewater ; 
solid waste 
management ; 
and urban 
planning, 
greening , and 
biodiversity   P: BBMP  
 
S: Sector 
specific 
department
s such as  
BESCOM, 
BWSSB, 
Transport, 
SWM, 
Urban 
Planning, 
Forestry, 
and 
Horticultur
e Infrastructur
e for disaster 
management  Enhance d 
resilience of 
basic services 
against  
disasters  Improved 
chances of  
uninterrupte
d access to 
services  
during 
disasters  Better access 
to services  2026  
 
DM
- 
2.4 Ensure compliance  with  norms 
pertaining to land use , resource 
management , and health and 
safety , to enhance disaster 
resilience. Strengthen the 
sustainable use and management 
of natural resources and blue -
green networks in the city to 
enhance resilience.   Aligned with 
multiple 
actions in the 
Urban 
Planning, 
Greening and 
biodiversity 
sector , such as  
UPGBD -1.1, 
3.1, 3.3, 3.8, 
5.5, 5.6  P: BBMP  
 
S: BDA, 
BMRDA, 
LDA  Infrastructur
e for disaster 
management  A proactive 
governing 
structure 
that regularly 
monitors and 
evaluates the 
city’s land 
use patterns 
in 
accordance 
with the 
Town and 
Country 
Planning Act  Enhanced 
resilience of 
the city ’s 
infrastructur
e Better 
planned city 
leading to 
better 
livability and 
economic 
efficiency  2026  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   291  
 
DM
- 
2.5 Encourage disaster -resilient 
design and construction 
techniques , especially for critical 
facilities such as  hospitals, fire 
stations, and schools , informed by 
the critical disasters identified for 
Bengaluru  as per CCRA -VA, to 
ensure that they remain safe, 
effective and operational during 
and after disasters . a. Developing 
a Disaster 
Resilience 
Responsibility 
Framework , 
and 
Preparedness 
and Response , 
under  the 
Karnataka 
State Disaster 
Management  
Plan , 2020 -21 
b. Karnataka 
State  
Action Plan for  
Climate 
Change and 
Human Health  P: BBMP  
  Health sector 
disaster 
preparedness 
and 
response , 
and human  
resource 
development 
for 
emergency 
medical 
services  Resilient 
infrastructur
e of 
emergency 
services  Better access 
to emergency 
services  Enhanced 
resilience of 
the city’s 
infrastructure  2026  
 
DM
- 
2.6 Mainstreaming disaster risk 
reduction into the city’s master  
plan   Aligned with 
action no. 
UPGBD -2.5  P: BDA  
  RMP 2035  A robust 
infrastructur
e system at 
the planning 
stage , 
ensuring 
better 
preparedness  Enhanced 
Resilien ce of 
the city Reduction in 
loss and 
damage 
during 
disasters  2031  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   292  
 
DM
- 
2.7 Conduct an assessment of the 
impact of climate hazards on 
public health and  the 
preparedness of the city's health 
care systems , to manage the same 
for all segments of the population  a. Enhance the 
resilience of  
State health 
systems by  
integrating 
DRM into  
primary, 
secondary and  
tertiary health 
care , as per 
Karnataka 
State Disaster 
Management 
Plan , 2020 -21 
b. Karnataka 
State  
Action Plan for  
Climate 
Change and 
Human Health  P: BBMP  
 
S: 
Departmen
t of Health  Health sector 
disaster 
preparedness 
and 
response , 
and human  
resource 
development 
for 
emergency 
medical 
services  Comprehensi
ve 
understandin
g of the 
interlinkage  
between 
disasters and 
health  Well -
developed  
health 
infrastructur
e that 
incorporat es 
disaster -
related 
health risks 
into its work  Reduction in 
severe health -
related risks 
due to 
disasters  2025  
 
DM
- 
2.8 Mandate  integration of disaster 
risk management into business 
models of organisations across the 
supply chain , to increase business 
resilience and protection of 
livelihoods and productive assets 
throughout the supply chain 
within the city , across sectors and 
communities , so as to ensure 
continuity of services.   a. Karnataka 
State Disaster 
Management 
Plan , 2020 -21 P: BBMP  
 
S: 
Governmen
t and non -
governmen
t 
stakeholder
s PPP models  Planned 
businesses  
that are 
prepared to 
handle 
disruptions  
due to 
disasters  Reduction in 
economic 
loss during 
disasters  a. Better 
resilience 
during 
disasters  
b. Faster 
recovery from  
disasters  2026  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   293  
 
DM
- 
2.9 Encourage private sector 
participation to promote 
innovations for solution -driven 
research technology advancement 
in disaster risk reduction. PPP 
model s can be adopted to 
establish, disseminate , and share 
good practices . a. Karnataka 
State Disaster 
Management 
Plan , 2020 -21 
b. Climate -
resilient and 
disaster -safe 
development  P: BBMP  
 
S: 
Governmen
t and non-
governmen
t research 
institutes, 
start -ups, 
etc.  PPP models  Technolog ica
l 
advancement 
and 
innovations 
leading to 
better 
management 
of disasters  Loss and 
damage 
reduction  Increased 
economic 
efficiency  2027  
 
DM
- 
2.10  Create enablers for insurance  and 
other financial protection 
mechanisms, to reduce  the burden 
of disaster -related financial  losses 
on governments , communities, 
and individuals . a. Karnataka 
State Disaster 
Management 
Plan , 2020 -21 
b. Manual on 
administration 
of State and 
National 
Disaster 
Response 
Fund  P: BBMP  
 
S: 
Departmen
t of Finance  PPP models  An elaborate 
financial 
protection 
mechanism 
for disasters  Reduction in 
economic 
losses during 
disasters  a. Better 
resilience 
during 
disasters  
b. Faster 
recovery from  
disasters  2026  
DM- 3: Empower citizens, civil society and local platforms to adopt  a decentral ised and inclusive approach towards DRR . 
Goal/Target: Empowered ward committees for better local ised preparedness  for, response to, and recovery from  disasters .  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   294  
 
DM
- 
3.1 Set up zone- or ward-level Disaster 
Management Cells empowered 
with regulatory and financial 
means , to work and coordinate 
with civil society, communities , 
and other locals in the region , for 
disaster risk management at the 
local level . This should include:  
 
- Plan of action to improve and 
strengthen the capacity at the local 
level  
- Identification of l ocalised 
shelters/safe zones that can be 
accessed by all   
- Evacuat ion of  persons living in 
disaster -prone areas when 
essential  
- Prompt action to meet locals’  
needs when they  lack access to 
services.  a. Karnataka 
State Disaster 
Management 
Plan 2020 -21 P: BBMP  
 
S: Sector -
specific 
department
s such as  
BESCOM, 
BWSSB, 
Transport, 
SWM, 
Urban 
Planning, 
Forestry, 
and 
Horticultur
e BBMP 
budget  A local 
responsible 
agency will 
be created 
for ease of 
access by 
local 
residents  A 
decentral ised 
approach 
will be 
initiated , 
making 
wards self-
reliant  to a 
great degree  Enhance 
inclusivity 
through 
greater local 
involvement  2025  
 
DM
- 
3.2 Equip local wards with regular and 
updated information systems to 
deal with disasters within their 
ward boundaries.   Karnataka 
State Disaster 
Management 
Plan 2020 -21 P: BBMP  
  BBMP 
budget  A local 
responsible 
agency will 
be created 
for ease of 
access by 
local 
residents  A 
decentral ised 
approach 
will be 
initiated , 
making 
wards self-
reliant  to a 
great degree  Enhance 
inclusivity 
through 
greater local 
involvement  2025  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   295  
 
DM
- 
3.3 Establish a local -level disaster help 
and redressal system by setting up 
community centres that could be a 
one-point contact for creating 
public awareness, having the 
necessary materials to implement 
rescue and relief activities and to 
implement  relief measures or 
compensations  that the 
government proposes.  Karnataka 
State Disaster 
Management 
Plan , 2020 -21 P: BBMP  
  BBMP 
budget  Easy access 
to local 
resources , 
instead of 
going 
through a 
central ised 
system  Better access 
to 
information  Equitable 
access to a 
local redressal 
system  2025  
 
DM
- 
3.4 Partner with local SHGs, citizen 
action groups, NGOs , etc., to 
disseminate information and 
awareness on disaster 
preparedness, response , and 
recovery mechanisms.  Karnataka 
State Disaster 
Management 
Plan , 2020 -21 P: BBMP  
 
S: Local 
citizen 
action 
groups, 
NGOs, 
SHGs etc  BBMP 
budget  A well 
networked 
governance 
system with 
local groups  Better access 
to 
information 
and faster 
response and 
recovery  Enhance 
inclusivity and 
equitable 
access 
through a 
decentral ised 
system  2026  
DM- 4: Enhance ecosystem capacity to reduce disaster risk through better response .  
Goal/Target: Reduction in loss of life, livelihoods , and assets due to climate and environment al hazards .  
 
DM
- 
4.1 Conduct regular capacity -building 
workshops and training for 
personnel across agencies 
responsible for disaster response 
and 
strengthen their logistical 
capacities to better respond to 
disasters.  a. Karnataka 
State Disaster 
Management 
Plan , 2020 -21 
b. DC 
Handbook on 
Climate 
Resilience  P: BBMP  
 
S: KSDMA  BBMP 
budget  Greater 
awareness 
amongst 
locals on 
better 
management 
of disasters  Better 
preparednes
s by 
residents to 
deal with  
disasters  Overall 
increase in 
local 
confidence in 
the ability to 
manage  
efficiently and 
inclusively 
during 
disasters  2024  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   296  
 
DM
- 
4.2 Conduct r egular sensitis ation  
workshops in ward committees 
and relevant stakeholders at ward 
levels on disaster management.  Karnataka 
State Disaster 
Management 
Plan , 2020 -21 P: BBMP  
 
S: KSDMA  BBMP 
budget  Greater 
awareness 
amongst 
locals on 
better 
management 
of disasters  Better 
preparednes
s by 
residents 
during 
disasters  Overall 
increase in 
local 
confidence in 
the ability to 
manage  
efficiently and 
inclusively 
during 
disasters  2024  
  DM
- 
4.3 Create a localised knowledge 
repository on disasters through 
expediential  sharing across 
different stakeholders.  Karnataka 
State Disaster 
Management 
Plan , 2020 -21 P: BBMP  
 
S: 
KSNDMC, 
KSDMA 
and other 
stakeholder
s such as  
research 
institutes, 
and local 
citizen s’ 
groups  BBMP 
budget  A detailed 
and inclusive 
knowledge 
repository 
system for 
sharing  Means and 
mechanism 
for 
knowledge -
sharing , 
creating a 
comprehensi
ve 
knowledge 
base at the 
ward level  Greater 
awareness 
and 
understanding  
of local  
concerns  2025  
 
  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   297  
5.4 Fostering  inclusivity in climate action  
Inclusivity is vital for the success of a climate action plan , as it creates an environment that 
values diversity, promotes equal access, and embraces diverse contributions. By including the 
perspectives  and interests of  diverse stakeholder groups , climate action plan  can be more 
effective, equitable, and sustainable. Inclusivity enables diverse stakeholders to participate, 
leading to increased engagement, resilience, adaptation, collaboration, and innovation. To 
foster inclusivity, the city  will engage diverse stakeholders, ensure accessible communication, 
address pa rticipation barriers, build capacity, priorit ise inclusivity , support community -led 
initiatives, collaborate with partners, and evaluate strategies regularly.  
 
Guidance from the i nclusive community engagement playbook developed by C40 cities  
Inclusive community engagement plays a crucial role in the development and success of climate 
action plans. This playbook highlights the implementation of a comprehensive community 
engagement that can help a city foster inclusivity and effectively address climate change challenges. 
Key engagement approaches of the playbook : 
 
• Importance of citizen involvement : Emphas ise engaging citizens in climate initiatives for 
addressing societal inequality, gaining public support, minim ising unintended 
consequences, and encouraging community -led action.  
• Challenges and core principles : Address challenges in community engagement and 
highlight core principles such as ongoing process, transparency, and diversity and 
inclusivity.  
• Vision setting : Set a clear agenda for engagement strategy development.  
• Mapping and analysis : Identify priority stakeholders, understand their interests and 
influence, and devise effective communication strategies.  
• Design and implementation : Util ise inclusive techniques and tools to engage key 
stakeholders, including hard -to-reach groups.  
• Feedback and evaluation : Assess the effectiveness of engagement strategies, identify areas 
for improvement, and enhance future efforts.  
 
By performing these engagement approach es, the city can achieve inclusivity, effective community 
involvement, improved public support, and equitable climate strategies.  
 
Achieving inclusivity in and through the BCAP  will be based on a comprehensive approach 
spanning  the stages of planning, designing, and implementing climate actions. This entails a 
four -pronged approach  that enable s informed participation, diverse perspectives, equitable 
engagement, and priorit ise social and environmental justice, resulting in sustainable and 
equitable outcomes.  
• Awareness and access to information : Raise awareness and provide accessible 
information on climate change and action through campaigns, education, and digital 
platforms.  
• Inclusive processes: Encourage meaningful participation of all stakeholders through 
workshops, consultations, and public meetings to incorporate diverse perspectives.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   298  
• Enhancing the capacity of ecosystem s to embed inclusivity : Build the capacity of 
stakeholders through training and knowledge -sharing to effectively integrate 
inclusivity into climate action plans.  
• Inclusive policies: Priorit ise social and environmental justice, considering vulnerable 
communities' needs and preventing inequalities through policies such as financial 
support, equitable pricing, and inclusive job creation.  
 
Monitoring and evaluation mechanisms will also be established throughout the 
implementation stage , to assess the effectiveness and inclusivity of climate actions  (see 
Chapter  7). Regular assessments and feedback loops will help Bengaluru  identify gaps or 
shortcomings and make necessary adjustments , to ensure that inclusivity remains at the 
forefront of the city’s  climate initiatives.  
Adopt Information, Education, and Communication (IEC)  initiatives  
During the preparation  of the BCAP , special attention was focused on ways  to ensure effective 
information dissemination, through  the Information, Education, and Communication (IEC) 
process. To educate the target audience on climate change concepts, mitigation strategies, and 
adaptation measures, a consultation toolkit consisting of videos, posters, an instruction 
manual, and a feedb ack form was created and distributed. Enhancing inclusivity, the toolkit 
included a bilingual video and feedback form to incorporate community concerns and 
perspectives in the climate action plan. The materials were easily accessible in both English 
and Kannada , maxim ising their reach. Access the toolkit here . 
Additionally, each sector has placed emphasis on implementing relevant actions outlined in 
the BCAP to foster IEC. For instance, in Section 5.3.3, Action 2.1 highlights the significance of 
collaborating with NGOs to conduct IEC campaigns. These campaigns aim to influence social 
behaviour  and to conduct surveys in order to promote decentral ised composting and recycling 
in residential communities, markets, public and religious gatherings, parks, and gardens. 
Active citizen participation is encouraged to enhance resource recovery, minim ise waste 
disposal, and ensure accountability for green initiatives. Likewise, every sector has integrated 
actions that priorit ise raising awareness and facilitating access to information, thus promot ing 
inclusivity during the design and planning stages of climate actions.  
To ensure the inclusive and effective implementation of climate action, a user -friendly  
bilingual  website will be created as the central hub of information and resources . This website 
will serve as a platform for disseminating information and raising awareness about climate 
action. Additionally, a digital Monitoring, Evaluation, and Reporting (MER) platform will be 
implemented to cater to all stakeholders. It will have a  public ly accessible  interface in the form 
of a dashboard to ensure wide dissemination of information  and key performance indicators 
for the BCAP , with a specific focus on inclusivity parameters . Stakeholder departments can 
also play a crucial role in facilitating access to relevant information, resources, and 
technologies. This may involve providing information about available funding, grants, and 
support programme s, as well as connecting them with local organ isations and networks that 
can assist in climate action efforts.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   299  
Establish inclusive processes  
Ensuring inclusive climate actions requires engaging diverse stakeholders, including 
representatives from various communities, especially marginal ised groups, in decision -
making processes. This is achieved through public consultations, community meetings, and 
workshops , to gather input s and feedback on climate action plans. During the preparation of 
the climate action plan, a range of stakeholder consultative sessions w as implemented to 
ensure that the voices of all stakeholders, including departments, subject matter experts, 
Resident Welfare Associations (RWAs), non -governmental organ isations (NGOs), and others 
were heard. These sessions incorporated bilingual feedback forms and a combination of virtual 
and in-person consultations to strengthen the relationship between the government and the 
community. Further details on the series of consultations can be found in Chapter  1. 
Additionally, each sector has emphasised the implementation of  relevant actions outlined in 
the BCAP to foster inclusive processes. For instance,  in Section 5.3. 6, Action 2. 6 highlights the 
significance of this, by saying that a ll plan preparation, particularly at the local area/ward level, 
should ensure the participation of the informal sector, and of vulnerable and marginal ised 
communities.  Likewise, every sector has integrated actions that priorit ise inclusive processes , 
thus promoting inclusivity during the design and planning stages of climate actions.  
To ensure inclusive processes in climate action  implementation , departments must conduct 
comprehensive assessments to understand the needs, challenges, and priorities of vulnerable 
communities. This entails gathering data about  their living conditions, vulnerabilities to 
climate change impacts, and existing knowledge and practices related to climate action. Active 
engagement of these communities is crucial, fostering participatory processes that empower 
them to contribute to deci sion -making. This can be ach ieved through community meetings, 
focus group discussions, and workshops, which provide platforms for sharing diverse 
perspectives, ideas, and concerns. Incorporating these inputs into the climate action plan 
helps elevate diversity, equity, and inclusion in the overall process.  
Enhanc e ecosystem capacity  
To enhance the capacity of the ecosystem to embed inclusivity in the implementation of the 
BCAP, several measures are proposed. Firstly, an assessment of climate action planning and 
implementation capacity will be conducted in stakeholder departments, identi fying gaps in 
knowledge, human resources, skills, and financial resources. This assessment will be carried 
out by the Climate Action Cell (CAC), with the assistance of a technically equipped institute. 
Sensit isation, training, and capacity -building program mes will be designed and implemented 
by the CAC, focusing on modules such as mitigation, adaptation, GHG inventory, climate 
change risk assessment, climate budget reporting, and inclusive climate action. Collaboration 
with government and private players will  be sought for the successful implementation of these 
programme s. 
Moreover, each sector within the BCAP recogn ises the importance of inclusive processes and 
has incorporated relevant actions. For example, Section 5.3.2, Action 2.11 highlights the 
training of women drivers and the inclusion of safety features like panic buttons and women -
only compartments to improve safety and promote the use of public transport by women. 
Similar efforts have been integrated across sectors to ensure the embedding of inclusivity 
during the design and planning stages of climate actions.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   300  
To further foster inclusivity, partnerships and networks will be established with various 
government agencies, non -governmental organ isations, community -based organ isations, and 
other stakeholders involved in climate action and poverty alleviation. These collaborations will 
help create a supportive ecosystem and facilitate the involvement of urban poor migrants in 
the planning, implementation, and monitoring of climate  action initiatives.  
Design inclusive policies  
Inclusive policies are crucial for achieving inclusive climate action, as they promote fairness, 
address inequalities, empower marginal ised communities, maxim ise climate solutions, 
strengthen resilience, and enhance social cohesion. The BCAP recogn ises the significance of 
inclusivity in every sector and incorporates relevant actions. For instance, in  Section 5.3.1, 
Action 2.10, the city aims to subsid ise reversible ceiling fans for vulnerable and low -income 
groups, improving indoor air circulation and providing heating and cooling options. Similar 
actions  are integrated across sectors to ensure inclusivity in climate actions from the early 
design and planning stages. The city can achieve inclusive policies by conducting asses sments, 
engaging diverse stakeholders, and developing targeted initiatives, as highlighted in the action 
tracks of each sector. As stated in Section 5.3.5, Action 2.15, community participation, 
monitoring mechanisms, and continuous policy improvement should be priorit ised. By 
focusing on improving policies towards inclusivity, the city can promote social equity, enhance 
climate action outcomes, and improve overall well -being. Inclusive policies address 
disparities, tap into diverse knowledge, and foster res ilient and prosperous urban 
environments.  
  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   301  
 
  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   302  
6 GOVERNANCE OF BCAP AND INSTITUTIONAL STRUCTURES  
6.1 Aligning BCAP governance with existing institutional structures  
From a sectoral perspective, the functioning of Bengaluru is managed  and governed by various 
agencies over and above the key functions performed by BBMP. For the seven sectors 
identified under  the BCAP  for action orientation, a sector -wise mapping of institutional 
responsibilities was done ( see Annexure I ). Figure 29 in Chapter 2 presents a summary of  
relevant sector -wise departments/agencies and their key responsibilities  across four thematic  
buckets , i.e., a) visioning strateg ising, planning , and governance, b) implementation and 
enforcement, c) monitoring, and d) others . This exercise helped identify suitable agencies 
against the various responsibilities  for the governance of the BCAP.  
The objective of the governance structures  for the BCAP  is to put in place institutional 
structures and mechanisms for: a) effective implementation of the CAP as a cross -sectoral 
agenda, b) foster ownership among st a diverse set of stakeholders (both state and non -state), 
and c) mainstream climate action in city planning and governance. While the first objective is 
to enhance the success of the CAP in the short term, the latter  two are complementary to each 
other in ensuring the sustainability of city clima te action in the long term. The governance -
related actions  therefore emerge from the four tenets (illustrated in Figure 69) to foster 
implementability with a feedback loop , as summar ised below.  
Figure 69 Tenets  of BCAP  governance  
 
1. Ensure coherence across sector policies and plans , and seamless coordination 
among st agencies  
The objective of the actions  under this tenet is to ensure a policy and planning ecosystem that 
is coherent , with a shared vision to build climate action as a common aim, and to ensure 
regular coordination of activities spanning multiple sectors led by different agencies.  
The recommended actions for ensuring coherence  are summarised  in Table 17 below:  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   303  
Table 17 Actions recommended to ensure coherence  
Action  Description  Responsible office  
1.1 Constitute a high -level 
committee on climate 
action for Bengaluru .  
 Will  include heads of key stakeholder 
departments, representatives of academia, 
NGO s and practitioners who will , from time 
to time , give direction for implementation/ 
periodi c revision/ governance/ way forward 
of the BCAP . GoK  in consultation 
with BBMP  
1.2 Create and 
operationalise a climate 
action cell  (CAC) . Will  be suitably organ ised to be responsible 
for day to day coordination activities, 
collation of data and information  for 
MERL , support in project preparation and 
implementation and periodic updating  of 
GHG inventory and CCRA -VA for 
Bengaluru. Refer to section 6.3 for further 
details.  BBMP in coordination 
with stakeholder 
departments  
1.3 Mandate and start 
climate budget 
reporting  Departments to report spending on 
activities/projects taken up in/for 
Bengaluru which directly contribute to 
climate change mitigation and/or 
adaptation goals suggested in the BCAP. 
Refer to section 6.5 for further details.  GoK and  individual 
departments. The 
proposed  CAC  will 
facilitate sensit isation 
and training of 
departments on 
climate budgeting.  
1.4 Include climate change 
as a key aspect in all 
departmental mandates . Departments will clearly identify and 
acknowledge their role in climate change 
mitigation and/or adaptation , include the 
same in their mandate , and publish it on  
their website . GoK , individual 
departments  relevant 
for Bengaluru  
1.5 Designate/ appoint a 
nodal officer in each 
department/agency for 
ensuring  the inclusion 
of climate change 
agenda in 
policies/plans/ 
programme s/ projects . The nodal officer will be the main point of 
contact for the CAC , will be responsible for 
coordinating with the cell  for all activities 
pertaining to the implementation of the 
BCAP identified for that department, and 
share data and status update s.  Individual 
departments  relevant 
for Bengaluru  
 
2. Catalyse ownership and agency across stakeholder groups on city climate action 
agenda  
The intent of the actions under this tenet is to foster a sense of ownership to commit to climate 
actions in both letter and spirit by stakeholder agencies , and to create an enabling ecosystem 
for participation by non -state actors in taking forward the climate action agenda in Bengaluru. 
The idea is to not only encourage institutional tools and platforms for making climate action 
as a local agenda , but also nudge radical partnerships across stakeholder groups.  
Table 18 summar ises the recommended actions for achieving the above . 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   304  
Table 18 Actions recommended to catalyse ownership  
Action  Description  Responsible 
office  
2.1 Prepare local/ ward -
level plans with climate 
action as a mandatory 
component .  
 This resonates  with the need for a micro -level 
planning tool , which is missing from present 
hierarchies of spatial plans governing the 
growth and development of Bengaluru.  Joint exercise  with 
inputs from Ward 
Committees, 
community -based 
organizations,  
BBMP, CAC, BDA 
and with support 
from suitable 
technical 
organ isations  
2.2 Include climate action 
as an agenda in ward 
committee mandates .  Will  be included as a part of the mandate for 
ward committees .  BBMP, GoK  
2.3 Create a climate 
working group at zone -
/ward -level . These should include  representatives from all 
citizen groups , especially vulnerable 
communities (poor, women, elderly) , and 
NGOs  to capture  the impacts of climate 
change, discuss potential solutions, and 
monitor the implementation of projects.  BBMP zonal 
offices. The 
working groups 
can interact with 
the CAC 
periodically  
2.4 Create a collaborative 
and shared platform for 
spatial data/analytics .  To visual ise climate change risks and 
vulnerabilities at different scales, and to map 
loss and damage including crowd -sourced 
data .  Climate Action Cell  
2.5 Create a forum for 
locally -led climate 
action in Bengaluru . To build a consensus on the priorities of 
climate action in Bengaluru , empowered by 
dialogue and informed knowledge . Non -state  
 
3. Build adequate capacity among st all actors for planning and implementing the 
BCAP  
This is one of the most critical enablers for implementing the actions proposed under the 
BCAP and also ensur ing their long -term sustainability. The recommended actions under this 
tenet are mentioned in Table 19. 
Table 19 Actions recommended to build capacity for implementing  the BCAP  
Action  Description  Responsible 
office  
1.1 Assess climate action 
planning and 
implementation 
capacity in stakeholder 
departments identified 
for BCAP . To assess gaps in knowledge, human resource, 
skills and financial resources in all stakeholder 
departments and agencies , and identify areas 
for improvement .  
 CAC with support 
from an institute 
technically 
equipped to carry 
out such 
assessment  
1.2 Design and conduct 
sensit isation, training,  
and capacity -building 
on climate action  With specific modules on mitigation, 
adaptation, GHG inventory, climate change 
risk assessment, climate budget reporting, 
inclusive climate action , among st others . CAC in partnership 
with government  
and private 
partners  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   305  
1.3 Establish a k nowledge 
dissemination platform 
on the BCAP . An open access digital platform with toolkits 
and training modules on climate action in both 
English and Kannada (videos, posters, 
manuals, guidelines, best practices, other 
useful references) . Climate Action Cell  
in partnership with 
private sector  
1.4 Create a pool of partner 
agencies . 
 Partner with academia  and NGOs to conduct  
awareness campaign and sensit isation/training 
sessions on climate action for government  
agencies, citizen groups, ward committees, 
ward -level climate action working groups, 
NGOs working at the ground level . Climate Action Cell  
in partnership with 
private sector  
1.5 Set up a p roject 
preparation facility  A designated wing to be  formed in partnership 
with a private -sector institute of repute , 
equipped to help translate climate actions in to 
bankable projects, forge partnerships and 
identify sources of funding.  BBMP  and GoK  
1.6 Allocate budgets for  
climate action gap 
funding for Bengaluru . A funding source to bridge gap s in finance to 
implement projects identified for 
recommended climate actions under the BCAP, 
after exploring available funding sources from 
existing central/state/city level schemes. 
Departments should prepare budget 
requirements for identified actions and 
indicate need for extra funding.  GoK  
 
4. Create  structures and  tools for an effective and efficient MERL system for BCAP  
implementation  
This is one of the  most critical enablers for assessing the progress of both planned climate 
actions and the achievement of larger BCAP goals and targets. An integrated digital 
platform for monitoring, evaluation, reporting and learning on  the BCAP will be created 
and operational ised to facilitate collaboration and coordination with efficiency and 
transparency. Details of the MERL framework are discussed  in Chapter  7. 
6.2  Setting up a Climate Action Cell  and support  mechanisms for the BCAP  
Considering the multi -sectoral and multi -stakeholder nature of the BCAP, a dedicated and 
capacitated institutional apparatus is required to implement  it and to institutional ise the 
climate action agenda as a permanent part of  the city’s planning and governance system. 
Setting  up a Bengaluru Climate Action Cell (CAC) is considered critical  for this purpose. The 
CAC will be primarily anchored in BBMP , with collaboration and participation from other 
departments/agencies as discussed  below.  
The key responsibilities of the CAC will be as follow s: 
1. Coordinat e with nodal officers (designated by each stakeholder department) for 
status update s on climate action in line with the suggested MERL framework 
described in Chapter  7.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   306  
2. Handle o peration and management of the MERL platform, flag ging  discrepancies , 
and report ing them  to the authorities  concerned . 
3. Take necessary approvals, channelise funds for climate action implementation, 
and facilitate training and capacity building activities .  
4. Coordinate collection of data for regular updating  of GHG inventory, loss and 
damage inventory and climate change risk and vulnerability assessment to support 
the technical wing of the CAC . 
5. Facilitate coordination of stakeholder departments with the BCAP Project 
Preparation Facility .  
The basic structure of the CAC will be constituted in line with this (see Figure 70). Headed by 
the Chief Commissioner, BBMP, t he operations of the CAC will be spearheaded  by an officer 
of Special Commissioner rank who will report to the Chief Commissioner . A Chief Scientist , 
Climate Action , (similar to the rank of a chief engineer  or above ) would  report to the Special 
Commissioner , and will be supported by suitable staff  tasked with  facilitat ing the  
administrative activities of  the CAC. The Chief Scientist, Climate Action , will act as the  CAC’s  
nodal officer and will lead all its activities.  At a higher level, the CAC will be guid ed by a high -
powered advisory committee , whose  members will include  Bengaluru ’s Development 
Minister, Development Commissioner , eminent experts, representatives of civil society  and of 
the MPC , and political representatives.   
In addition to  the Climate Action Cell, two more important facilitation centres are 
recommended to be created for the effective implementation of the BCAP , as described below.  
Technical support and knowledge centre for climate action  
The intent of creating this facility is  two-fold: one, to keep day -to-day administrative activities 
and core knowledge -based activities  seperate ; and two, to leverage existing resources within 
the city that can support the independence of the  core knowledge -based activities. 
Collaboration with public and private centres of excellence or reputed institutions with 
expertise relevant to  climate change will be encouraged.  This centre will further collaborate 
with other government  departments and non -governmen t organ isations , to perform the 
following core activities:  
1. Update the GHG inventory for Bengaluru every two years (if required in collaboration 
with other knowledge -based organ isations , such as IISc ). 
2. Create an annual report with analysis and insights from loss and damage data collected 
by the CAC . 
3. Assess the city’s climate change risks and vulnerabilities every three to five years . 
4. Be the  anchor agency for conducting training and capacity -building activities under 
the BCAP . 
Project preparation facility (PPF)  
This is another collaborative structure  to facilitate the implementation of the BCAP with the 
following primary responsibilities:  
1. Supporting government  departments and non -state stakeholders in creating bankable 
projects , contributing to mitigation and/or adaptation goals of the BCAP . 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   307  
2. Identify ing funding sources from ongoing government  schemes/budgetary allocations . 
3. Tapping  potential funding opportunities from private donors . 
4. Forg ing partnerships and collaborations with a diverse set of stakeholder 
organ isations across both state and non -state actors . 
The PPF will need  to collaborat e with organ isation s from the private sector (NGOs and 
consultants) with adequate experience and expertise in project formulation, budget 
preparation, fund raising , and partnership -building.  
The BCAP  governance framework with the CAC and the other two wings is illustrated in the 
figure below.  
 
Figure 70 BCAP governance structure  
 
Source: As identified by BBMP with the technical support of WRI India  
 
The box below gives an idea of the focus areas, mandate and staffing of the CAC set up in 
Mumbai.   
 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   308  
Mumbai Climate Action Cell  
Mumbai has been working towards setting up a Climate Action Cell (CAC) as recommended by the 
Mumbai Climate Action Plan (MCAP) , to be housed within the Environmental Department of 
Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) since it was the nodal coordinating agency for MCAP 
and related projects. This department will report to the Additional Municipal Commissioner (AMC) 
Western Suburbs, and be headed by the Deputy Municipal Commissioner (DMC)  – Environment . A 
group of honorary advisors (which can be expanded as the plan progresses) will support the Cell for 
the effective implementation of the MCAP. This department has five objectives:  
 
• To introduce new technical capacities in the corporation , which  is currently staffed with 
professionals trained to execute engineered projects;  
• To introduce innovation – use of smart  technologies, locally -led solutions, service delivery 
based on artificial intelligence and machine learning , and urban management – in order to 
meet climate targets;  
• To develop stringent guidelines for new infrastructure or building projects that align with 
climate goals and encourage line departments to use these for project approval , and to 
ensure regulatory enforcement;  
• To coordinate across departments within the corporation , and to mainstream climate 
resilience in existing and proposed projects;  and 
• To monitor MCAP progress, close data gaps, evaluate outcomes , and report on targets at 
city and local levels . 
 
The C AC will have a Scientific wing and a Planning wing. The Scientific wing will be responsible for 
environment al protection and pollution control, knowledge management and innovations , and 
green finance. The Planning wing will be responsible for sustainable urban landscapes, vulnerable 
communities, climate -resilient buildings , and integrated mobility. They will be supported by 
experienced professionals such as Senior Climate Scientist s, Sustainable Innovations and Finance 
Expert s, Senior Landscape Planner s, Senior Development Scientist s, Senior Architect s and Senior 
Transportation Planner s. These senior professionals will be supported by junior 
professionals/fellows having expertise in urban water resilience, GIS, civil engineering, climate 
finance, data analysis, equity and inclusion, energy efficiency and green buildings, road safety and 
street design and environmental communications.  
 
Learnings through the process of establishing the CAC in Mumbai:  
• The existing institutional structures, bureaucratic protocols, the lack of a  precedent , and 
the need for a strict hierarchy were challenges in getting approvals for most of the new 
staffing positions for the CAC. A few of these positions had to be renamed/modified to align 
with the existing hierarchical structure of the municipal corporation , which is currently 
more engineering -focused. For instance, the position of the Deputy Chief Scientist  had to 
be modified to Deputy Chief Engineer – Climate Change  and, Chief Planner  was renamed 
Deputy Municipal Architect – Climate Change . 
• The positions in the CAC are partly permanent and partly contractual. The top positions 
(i.e., Chief and Deputy Chief) are permanent. Senior experts and fellows are technical 
experts, who w ill be recruited on a contractual basis. This allows flexibility in hiring , as this 
is a new institutional entity , so that  the structure and positions can be altered  based on 
need and feedback. Also, there are several entry barriers for permanent government 
positions , and they often have a lower  pay range for expert posit ions such as planners  and, 
data analysts , compared to market rates. Thus, contractual positions allow for greater 
flexibility in terms of hiring and modifying the structure based on learnings and feedback.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   309  
• The BMC’s Environment Department is currently attached to the SWM Department , and is 
exploring how they can define and strengthen their role in improved environmental 
governance.  
• Considering the lengthy bureaucratic process for the recommended positions, as a short -
term plan , the BMC is in the process of hiring consultants  to take up activities such as 
developing the  GHG inventory , data management, and climate budgeting , to fulfil 
Mumbai’s  commitments as a C40 city and towards operational ising the MCAP.  
 
Source: Mumbai Climate Action Plan, 2022 , Insights from the MCAP team  
 
Considering the growing need for environment - and climate -related actions to be spearheaded 
by BBMP (such as climate action  and, air quality management), the idea of  a new Department 
of Environment and Climate Change within  BBMP is being considered . This department will 
have  the mandate to carry out functions relating to environment and climate change. Once 
functional, t he CAC will be instituted under this department.  
Figure 71 shows  the proposed structure and staffing of CAC . 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   310  
Figure 71: Constitution of the Bengaluru Climate Action Cell  
 
Source: As identified by BBMP with the technical support of WRI India  
 
 
 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   311  
Transition plan  
In the absence of a separate environment department within BBMP, this CAC  will be initially 
set up in an existing department which has experience in handling matters related to the 
environment . It is expected to take  the shape of a separate wing with dedicated  staff , in a time 
frame of one to two years , once the resources and operations of the CAC are streamlined.  
6.3  Funding climate action for Bengaluru   
6.3.1  Existing budgetary provisions for financing climate action in cities  
Cities in India receive funding for planning and executing their responsibilities from three 
primary sources aligned with the three -tier governance structure of India. The Central 
government allocate s funds under various schemes and missions, some of which are directly 
targeted at cities ( such as AMRUT  and Smart Cities Mission). In addition , cities or sector al 
agencies can access funds allocated under sector -specific programme s and schemes , which 
contribute to sustainable urban development (such as energy sector allocation s under the 
Ujjwala Mission, National Clean Air Program me). State governments also allocate funds in a 
similar fashion, i.e., targeted urban sector programme s, and sectoral allocations which can 
benefit cities. Moreover, state governments such as Karnataka allocate specific funds for 
improving quality of life in megacities such as  Bengaluru , as it is a major contributor to the 
state’s GDP. The third and most direct source of funding for cities is the municipality’s own 
sources of rev enue earned from taxes and other sources. More recently, cities in India have 
also been exploring non -conventional sources of funding , such as municipal bonds and 
borrowing from multilateral funding organ isations on a case -to-case basis.  The following 
sections summar ise the highlights of the recent Union Budget, Karnataka State Budget and 
BBMP’s own budget , to understand provisions that can directly or indirectly contribute 
towards actions proposed under the BCAP.  
Key highlights of Union Budget 2023 –24 
Several provisions made in the  Union Budget 2023 –24  align directly or indirectly towards  
India’s nationally declared climate goals and Sustainable Development Goals  while 
prioritizing inclusive development (Sitharaman 2023) . A few provisions which could be 
explored to unleash  potential  source s of funding for  implementing climate actions in 
Bengaluru are as following:   
• Green growth: India is moving towards net zero carbon emissions by 2070 , to usher 
in a green industrial and economic transition.  
o Energy transition towards the net zero objective : Rs 35,000 crore  is allotted for 
priority capital investment by MoPNG , for energy transition and net zero 
objective s. 
o National Green Hydrogen Mission:  To facilitate the transition to a low -carbon  
economy and to reduce India’s dependenc e on fossil fuel imports, Rs  19,700 
crore  is allocated towards this mission.  
o Enhancement of battery energy storage: To further steer the country towards 
sustainable development, batter y energy storage systems are being promoted 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   312  
with the goal of setting up such storage of 4,000 MwH with viability gap 
funding.  
o Green Credit Program me: To be notified under the Environment Protection Act 
of 1986 , to incentivise and mobil ise additional resources for environmentally 
sustainable and responsive actions.  
o GOBARdhan scheme:  A total investment of Rs 10,000 crore  to develop 500 
new waste -to-wealth  plants across the nation , which includes 75 plants in 
urban areas . A five percent compressed  biogas (CBG) mandate will be 
introduced  promoting a cleaner and more sustainable energy mix . 
o Amrut Dharohar: To promote wetlands and biodiversity, this scheme will be 
implemented for the next three years.  
o Vehicle replacement:  States will receive support in scrapping old vehicles , 
including  ambulances.  
• About Rs 23,153 crore  is allotted for metro projects nationwide, about Rs 450 crore  for 
Bengaluru suburban rail projects.  
• The n ational budget encourages  states and cities to undertake urban planning reforms 
and actions to transform cities by enhancing urban infrastructure, TOD,  etc. 
• Through property tax reforms , cities will be incentivised for municipal bonds.  
• An Urban Infrastructure Development Fund (UIDF) of Rs 10,000 crore  will be 
provided to sectors facing a  shortfall of funds. The states can leverage this through 15th 
Finance Commission grants.  
• An integrated online training platform (iGOT ) called  Karmayogi  was launched  to 
conduct capacity -building sessions for government employees to upgrade their skills.  
Important  urban sector central schemes through which some of the climate actions  could be  
taken up for implementation  are mentioned  below :   
• Prime Minister’s Awas Yojana -Urban (PMAY -U)- Address urban housing shortage 
among st the EWS/LIG and MIG categories to create climate -resilient communities.  
• National Urban Livelihood Mission (NULM) - Provides  universal financial inclusion 
for the urban poor, thereby enhancing the city’s resilience.  
• Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) and Smart Cities 
Mission - Provi des basic services (e.g., water supply, sewerage, urban transport) to 
households, and build amenities in cities to improve the quality of life.  
• Swacch Bharat Mission -Urban (SBM -U)- Eliminat e  open defecation, conversion of 
unsanitary toilets to pour flush ones, eradicat e of manual scavenging, municipal solid 
waste management, and bring about behavioural change . 
 
Highlights of Karnataka state budget 2023 -24 
The State Budget 2023 -24 presented on July 2023, directly or indirectly have few provisions 
for tackling climate change related challenges. Following are some of these provisions which 
could be further explored to act as potential sources of funding toward s implementing the 
actions recommended through the BCAP.  
• Brand Bengaluru:  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   313  
o “Brand Bengaluru ” as a theme was launched which is centered  on safety 
and convenience of the residents of Bengaluru city. The Brand Bengaluru 
theme is focused on addressing the nine major challenges facing the city 
namely, traffic management, environment, solid waste management, proper 
utilization of public places , public health, animal health, people friendly e -
Governance, water security and flood management.  
• Energy:  
o Gruha Jyothi  scheme provides energy guarantee (and affordable electricity) 
to every household and citizen of the state. Under this scheme, up to 200 
units of free electricity is provided to every household every month. Whilst the 
scheme provides free electricity, this  is also an endeavor to bring awareness 
among the people about judicious use of electricity. This scheme is 
implemented at an estimated annual cost of Rs. 13,910 crore.  
o A City Gas Distribution Policy  will be developed to facilitate the 
distribution network of natural gas in the state. The policy will facilitate 
uniform laying charges across the state.  
• Transport:  
o Shakti scheme  provides free bus travel to women and gender minorities in 
the four state -run road transport corporations - BMTC, KSRTC, NWKSRTC 
and KKRTC. An annual expenditure of Rs. 4,000 crore is estimated for this 
scheme.  
o In the next three years, Namma Metro  will be expanded to 2.5 times its 
present network coverage. Additionally, DPRs for few more lines will be 
submitted to government of India for approval.  
o To implement the Bengaluru Suburban Rail Project , Rs. 1,000 crore has 
been allocated this year.  
 
• Solid Waste Management:  
o Scientific disposal of waste in Bengaluru city will be prioritised. Legacy waste 
of 97 lakh tons will be treated through bio -mining and bio -remediation and in 
the coming 5 years, 256 acres of land will be converted into parks in 
Bengaluru city.  
o Rs. 3,400 crore is allocated for effective disposal of legacy waste, liquid waste 
management and to control the flow of pollutants into rivers and lakes. The 
project will prioritize adoption of modern systems of processing drainage 
water. Out of the total allocation, Rs. 1,250 crore is provided for Bengaluru 
city.  
o Bengaluru Solid Waste Management Corporation Limited (BSWMCL) has 
been established to collect, treat and dispose waste in a scientific and 
sustainable manner. Rs.100 crore is provided for the effective operation of 
this corporation.  
• Air Quality:  
o Various programs will be undertaken to enhance air quality in the state. An 
action plan will be prepared and implemented at a cost of Rs. 35 crore in year 
2023 -24 using funds available under Green Tax Fund created for this 
purpose.  
• Water & Sanitation:  
o Bengaluru Water Supply and Sewerage Board (BWSSB) will upgrade 20 
Sewage Treatment Plants by March, 2026 at a cost of Rs.1,411 crore.  BWSSB 
will execute this project using their own funds.  
• Greening:  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   314  
o An innovative program called ‘Sasya Shamala’ will be launched. Under this 
program, in the current year, 50 lakh saplings will be planted in and around 
schools. This will be done in collaboration with the Education and Forest 
Department.  
• Disaster Management:  
o To mitigate the consequences of climate change such as flood, drought and 
erosion of river banks, it is proposed to undertake works in the current year at 
a cost of Rs. 422 crore from State Disaster Mitigation Fund.  
o To reduce disaster risks and strengthen fire and emergency services, it is 
proposed to take up works at a cost of Rs. 721 crore from National Disaster 
Mitigation Fund (NDMF) such as flood control in Bengaluru, landslide risk 
mitigation in Kodagu, Chikkamag aluru, Dakshina Kannada and Hassan 
districts.  
o Under K -SAFE project of Department of Fire and Emergency Services, a grant 
of Rs. 100 crore will be provided in 2023 -24 for purchasing fire -fighting 
vehicles and to undertake construction work of 3 -Bay fire station buildings in 
Soopa, Yelahanka, Bhatkala, Arakera, Nagarabhavi, N.R. Pura, Shirahatti, 
Honnavara, Narasapura (Kolar District) industrial areas and Devanahalli 
aerospace industrial area.  
• For C entrally sponsored schemes such as Swachh Bharat 2.0  and Amrut 2.0 , 
state’s share has been allocated for projects under these.  
• Startup & innovation:  
a. Multiple programmes and projects are proposed to enable innovation and 
Start -Ups. These could facilitate innovation in the solving the climate challenge . Some 
of these are:  
o ‘INNOVERSE’ - a world class incubation centre with hi -tech facilities for Start -
Ups. For this, grant of Rs.10 crore has been earmarked in the current year.  
o  ‘Propel’ a program to accelerate the adoption of solutions of Start -Ups which 
have been funded by the government under the ‘Start -up Policy’. Rs. 1 crore 
has been set aside for this in the current year.  
• To reduce carbon footprint, Environmental Management and Policy Research 
Institute (EMPRI) will undertake assessment of all major schemes of government 
and ensure environmental balance.  
• To promote decarbonisation of economy and encourage green growth, a scheme will 
be commenced for the voluntary disclosure of Green House Gases (GHGs) by the 
organisations in the state.  
 
 
 
Highlights of BBMP budget 2023 –24 
The fiscal outlay of BBMP’s  2023 –24 budget is Rs 11,163 crore . This budget  (Opencity 2023)  
focuses on major sectors such as engineering (for r oads , stormwater , lakes , slums , etc.) , town 
planning, air quality , solid waste, energy , health , and welfare . Refer  to Figure 72 below.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   315  
Figure 72 BBMP budget 2023 –24 
 
(Engineering includes roads , stormwater , lakes , and slums ) 
Source: BBMP budget highlights  
 
Bengaluru can util ise the budget provisions outlined in the 2023 -24 budget of BBMP to 
implement various climate actions. Here are some ways in which these provisions can be used:  
• Town planning:  The BBMP allocated  Rs 40 crore to determine and identify the 
agency ’s properties, including geo -tag GPS marking of lakes, digit isation of records, 
chain -link fencing and installation of nameplates. This will give impetus to the scheme 
to preserv e BBMP ’s assets and turn them into sources of income. Allocation of these 
funds  for identifying and preserving BBMP's properties can be used to priorit ise and 
protect green spaces, including lakes and parks, within the city. This will contribute to 
enhancing the city's resilience to climate change and preserving biodiversity.  
• Engineering:  Over Rs. 9000 crore  is allotted for improving roads,  the stormwater 
drain network, lakes, slums , etc. Of this amount , in continuation to the 2022 –23 
budget allocation of Rs.6 ,000 crore  (for the three implementation years from 2022), 
budgetary allocations are being utilised  for actions in the current year , such as the 
following : 
o Roads:  Develop ment of  high density  corridors, grade seperators,  road -
widening projects, reconstruction of BWSSB excavated roads (in line with  State 
budget), and decongestion of traffic junctions.  
o Stormwater drains:  Owing to continuous rainfall and floods in the city, 
BBMP allotted a total of about Rs 120 crore  from the Rs 3,000 crore  state 
budget allocation to create resilient infrastructure towards flood management. 
Actions such as primary, secondary and tertiary drain repair and maintenance ; 
repair of roads/pavement and desilt ing of drain s can be taken up.  
o Lakes:  Comprehensive development of 12 lakes for Rs 35 crore . To utilise 
Bengaluru’s big lakes for flood control by installing sluice gates , an additional 
amount of Rs  15 crore  has been allocated.  2,5929545017.252096,8731901056540526
OthersHorticulture and ForestryAir QualityEnergySolid WasteEngineeringWelfareHealthEducationTown PlanningAdministrationBBMP BUDGET 2023 -24 
(in Rs. Crore)
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   316  
o Slum development:  Rs 80 crore  is earmarked to redevelop all the slums in 
the city.  
These provisions provide an opportunity to incorporate climate -resilient design principles. 
This includes developing green corridors and integrating nature -based solutions to 
mitigate urban heat island effect s and enhance water management.  
• Air quality:  About Rs 450 crore  is allotted for air pollution control projects , which is 
also part of the mandate under the 15th Finance Commission grants to reduce air 
pollution . It includes various projects to be implemented  by different stakeholders 
such as BBMP, BWSSB, BESCOM, BMTC, KSPCB, DULT, etc.  These projects can be 
utilised to implement measures aimed at reducing vehicular emissions and can help in 
dust suppression and improving air quality . 
• Energy:  BBMP has also earmarked approx imately Rs  17.25 crore  to reduce power 
consumption by proposing to replace sodium vapour lights with LED fittings . This can 
lead to energy savings and reduced greenhouse gas emissions.  BBMP ’s budget also 
included the provision that solar rooftop net metering would be taken up in 2023 -24 
on all  BBMP  buildings under the 15th Finance Commission grant. This will promote 
renewable energy generation and help  reduc e the city’s carbon footprint.  
• Waste:  The BBMP budget states that 22 lakh metric tonnes of waste in four  dumping 
yards will be bio -mined at a cost of  Rs 209 crore . There is a specific mention in the 
BBMP budget on managing C&D waste, provision of new waste -segregated auto 
tippers, a bio -CNG unit , and a 100-acre integrated solid waste management centre 
which will be developed to make Bengaluru a zero -waste city. This includes promoting 
waste segregation, recycling, composting, and the generation of bio -CNG from organic 
waste. However, det ails on fund allocation for these activities have not been elaborated 
in the budget.   
• Horticulture and forestry:  Rs. 15 crore  is allotted to develop 15 new parks across 
the city , while around Rs. 80 crore is earmarked  to maintain existing parks.  These  
funds  can be util ised to enhance the city’s green cover, which contributes to improving 
air quality, mitigating heat, and providing recreational spaces for citizens.  
• Welfare and inclusive growth : BBMP has allotted Rs 40 crore  to provide health 
insurance to pourakarmikas , Rs 65 crore  for improved quality education, over Rs 100 
crore  to improve health and medical conditions , etc. Under the Onti Mane scheme, the 
city has allotted 100 crore  to provide housing to 1 ,500 beneficiaries. About 67 ,385 
street vendors have been  identified by BBMP under the Prime Minister Swanidhi 
scheme and Rs 25 crore  is earmarked to develop street hawking zones across the city. 
These allocations can contribute to improving the overall well -being and resilience of 
vulnerable communities in the face of climate change impacts.  
For effective implementation of BCAP, city agencies must  align city projects to support climate 
action as a strategic option and investment. Along with the existing budget allocation, the 
departments must  align climate  actions with current implementation mechanisms to attract 
additional funding from  private -sector , especially  in innovative green solutions .  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   317  
6.4  Preparing a climate budget for Bengaluru  
‘A climate budget is a governance system that offers a way for cities to turn climate 
commitments into funded and measurable actions across city government. It embeds climate 
targets, measures and considerations into decision -making as part of a city’s ordinary 
budgeting process .’ ('Climate Budgets ' C40 Cities)  About 13 cities around  the world , 
including Mumbai , are develop ing their own climate budgets  as part of a C40 pilot project.  
Below are two case examples  of how cities have been working towards accommodating climate 
action in their budgets.  
Source: MCAP, Oslo’s Climate Budget (c40knowledgehub.org), Source: C40 Climate Budget Pilot  Case 1: Oslo’s climate budget  
The city of Oslo incorporates the climate budget as a tool for governance, aiming to priorit ise its 
climate -related efforts. The climate budget outlines specific goals for emission reduction and 
proposes measures to be implemented within the municipality. It also highlights key initiatives 
necessary to achieve the emission reduction targets outlined in the climate strategy . The 
responsibility for executing these measures is assigned to the relevant municipal entities, who are 
required to report on their progress in a manner similar to financial reporting. Spanning the entire 
2023 –2026 economic plan period, the climate budget is an integral part of Oslo's financial 
budgeting process, overseen by the finance department. Its inclusion signifies that the city council 
can only approve spending plans that align with Oslo's climate objectives, firmly placing climate 
goals at the fore front of the financial budgeting process.  
Case 2: Mumbai’s climate budget  
During the preparation of Mumbai's climate action plan, a climate budget of Rs 1 crore  was set 
aside to establish a Climate Action Cell (CAC) and implement projects. This budget included 
various financial resources from BMC, state and centrally sponsored schemes, green bonds, and 
international funds. The goal was to use the budget as a gove rnance tool to overcome institutional 
barriers and involve parastatal agencies in climate actions within their control. As the climate 
budgeting process evolved, in February 2022, the allocation was made to establish the climate 
action cell, and was then carried forward to 2023. A climate budgeting exercise was conducted 
using instruction sheets and templates to assess the budget for climate action plans. The exercise 
involved analyzing the existing municipal budget, identifying climate -relevant department s, and 
mapping each budget item to the Mumbai Climate Action Plan (MCAP) actions.  Additionally, an 
ex-post assessment was conducted as part of the C40 climate budget pilot, analyzing the climate 
budget and assessing the positive and negative impacts of current expenditures.  The assessment 
included a detailed analysis of the climate sensitivity and relevance of each budget item. The 
findings were shared with relevant departments involved in climate initiatives. The exercise aimed 
to not only understand the allocation of funds but also gain insights into the governance structure 
of the corporation.  The assessment was submitted to the departments of environment and finance, 
leading to collaboration in developing a climate budgeting instructions template/manual. This 
template was circulated among st climate -relevant departments, gathering inputs to ensure its 
acceptance and identify necessary modifications for incorporating climate budget information.  
Currently, t he template is further being developed by applying it in the context of the storm water 
drainage department to understand its application . 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   318  
Summar ised below are four key  steps of the climate budgeting exercise  (Cities 2021) that 
Bengaluru will take up as it adopts its first -ever Climate Action Plan.  
Four steps of preparing a climate budget  for Bengaluru  
Step  1: Conduct s tart-up activities . 
This will include the following :  
• Identify a set of people in the city administration who will own the climate budget . 
Ideally , this would be  the chief financial officer (CFO) of the municipality , supported 
by a working group of people from relevant stakeholder departments.  
• A nodal officer for climate budgeting can be appointed to support the CFO in manag ing 
climate project budget allocation s, expenditure s, and outcome s.  
• Identify the boundaries of the climate budget, i.e., which jurisdiction it will apply  to. 
In the case of Bengaluru, the CAP jurisdiction is the BBMP area , and hence the climate 
budget should ideally  apply to this area . However, considering the spatial overlap  of 
natural -based  elements strongly influencing the city’s resilience, there may be  a need 
for budgeting for actions that will be implemented outside the BBMP limits.  
• Allocate  the initial budget for constituting the C AC. 
Step  2: Assess alignment of budget s with climate action .  
To align city budgets with climate action goals, the city must undertake the following step s:  
• Assess the current state of its climate -related initiatives, policies, and corresponding 
budget practices. This will help identify gaps and opportunities to include climate 
considerations in budgeting.  
• Start embedding  climate considerations in the budgeting process  by conducting the 
following  assessments :  
o Ex-ante assessment:  This involves evaluating the potential impact of a city's 
budget decisions on climate action before they are implemented. It helps 
identify whether the proposed budget aligns with the city's climate goals and 
objectives.  
o Ex-post assessment: This component involves evaluating the actual impact 
of budget decisions on climate action after they have been implemented. It 
assesses whether the budget allocations and expenditures have effectively 
contributed to the city's climate targets.  
o Project climate assessment : This aspect focuses on assessing the climate 
impact of specific projects funded through the city budget. It aims to ensure 
that projects are aligned with climate objectives and contribute positively to 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions or enhancing climate resilience.   
o Carbon budget framework:  A carbon budget sets a limit on the total 
amount of greenhouse gas emissions a city can emit within a specific 
timeframe. The pilot assesses the alignment of city budgets with their carbon 
budgets to ensure that financial decisions are consistent with emis sion 
reduction targets.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   319  
More details on the C40 climate budget pilot programme  and its key components/assessment 
methods are provided in Annexure  J1. 
Step  3: Prepare a climate budget . 
• Earmark  budgets specifically targeting climate action goals outlined in Chapter 5 for 
each sector, including goals, targets, action tracks for emission reduction, and 
resilience building.  Annexure  J2 contains a draft climate budget template provided by 
Mumbai as a reference sample.  (The template is currently undergoing further 
development and is meant to be used for reference purposes only .) 
• State  estimated impact of budgets on emission reduction and resilience building over 
time.  
• Identify yearly projects from the proposed actions in the CAP and earmark budgets 
against those including source of finance and responsibility f or implementing the 
same . 
• Regular updates of climate budgets in alignment with city budgets will be necessary on 
an annual basis.  
Step  4: Reporting and follow -up 
• Incorporate the climate budget into the MERL (Monitoring, Evaluation, Reporting, 
and Learning) framework. Reporting of climate budgets by agencies is an essential tool 
to understand spending to achieve CAP goals and targets and adhere to necessary 
MERL protocols and evaluate the climate budget.  
• Once the climate budget is prepared, the city should publish it. The summary of the 
climate budget should be made easily accessible to the general public through the 
public interface of the MERL platform.  
• Within the  MERL platform , regularly  monitor and track expenditures to ensure  they 
align with the prepared climate budget.  This allows for ongoing assessment and 
tracking of spending in accordance with climate goals and targets.  
• Conduct regular review s and refine the climate budgeting framework based on lessons 
learned, emerging best practices, and changing climate priorities. Adapt the process to 
evolving climate goals and integrate new assessment methods as they become 
available.  
  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   320  
 
 
 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   321  
7 MONITORING, EVALUATION, REPORTING AND LEARNING FOR 
BCAP  
 
Climate action planning involves the integration of monitoring, evaluation, and reporting 
(MER) to track and assess progress towards the targets set in the plan, thereby demonstrating 
the effectiveness of implemented actions. MER establishes structured pro cesses and systems 
that enable cities to effectively monitor and evaluate their progress, aligning it with the 
envisioned Theory of Change  at the project ’s outset. This crucial component of climate action 
plans brings several benefits, including accountabi lity, standard ised measurement and 
reporting, learning and improvement, transparency and communication, compliance with 
international commitments, and efficient resource allocation. By implementing MER, cities 
can systematically track their progress, ensure transparency, learn from their experiences, and 
optim ise their climate actions.  
This section builds upon the governance structure recommended for the implementation of 
the B CAP in the previous chapter , and lays down the objective, structures, and mechanisms 
for a comprehensive and outcome -oriented MER process.  While developing a MER 
framework, it is important to emphas ise that development is an iterative process. Each step of 
MER builds on the other s, to complete a feedback loop and help establish a planning process 
that continuously revisits its actions based on outcomes and initiates  necessary course 
correction.  Figure 73 summarily presents the three components of MER and how they should 
be ideally aligned to the theory of change or results framework envisaged for BCAP.  
Figure 73 Monitoring, evaluation, and reporting (MER) framework  
 
 Source: WRI India  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   322  
7.1 Monitoring  
Objective  
Monitoring generally refers to the systematic and continuous collection of data, quantitative 
and/or qualitative, about the progress of a project or intervention against its planned 
deliverables, outputs and outcomes. It plays an essential role in understa nding where to focus 
resources, which  actions are progressing as planned , and which ones  are not. Comprehensive 
and efficient monitoring mechanisms also help create the basis f or a platform to document 
continuous progress  and performance , which enables  learning from experience to the 
maxim ise effectiveness of an action.  
Monitoring framework  
Three levels of monitoring are required for the timely implementation of actions and ensuring 
their effectiveness.  
a) Progress of action implementation  
To understand and effectively communicate the progress of an action or goal set out in the 
climate action plan, it is important to estab lish a method to determine the type of 
measurement required to assess the progress in implementing the  action. This will be 
developed  by the CAC in consultation with key stakeholders. Below are examples of types of 
metrics considered by other C40 cities.  
Figure 74 Example from Kuala Lumpur's and Salvador’s CAP s 
 
Source: C. P. Department 2021; Salvador 2019  
 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   323  
Table 20 below  is an illustration of arriving at a template for identifying the data and 
information to be collected for action.  
Table 20: Illustrative example of CAP action implementation monitoring template  
Action  Activity  
(Only  example s are  given. 
More activities  may be  
required to implement an 
action .) Implementation 
status  Output indicators and 
data required  
Ensure the use of 
energy -efficient 
fixtures and appliances 
in all public buildings 
by 2030 . Departments/ 
offices in charge of 
public buildings 
tocreate a policy for 
replacing older 
fixtures and 
appliances with 
new energy saving 
ones, and all new 
appliances to be 
energy -efficient , 
and execute the 
same.  Not yet started /in 
preparatory stage/ 
partially implemented 
(indicate % 
implementation)/ 
implementation 
completed  - % increase in the 
energy -efficient fixtures 
and appliances in 
municipal and public 
buildings  
 
Monitoring frequency: 
Half -yearly  
  
Increase dry waste 
collection centres and 
aggregators in all the 
wards and set up 
Material Recovery 
Facilities (MRF) and 
facilities for producing 
refuse -derived fuel 
(RDF) . BBMP/BSWML 
should  increase 
DWCCs at every 
ward , include the 
material recovery 
facility within the 
centre , and 
encourage  dry 
waste packing 
manufacturers and 
waste collection 
agencies to 
collaborate and 
execute resource 
recovery.  Not yet started/ in 
preparatory stage/ 
partially implemented 
(indicate % 
implementation)/ 
implementation 
completed  - Total no. of MRF 
facilities  
- Total amount of RDF  
 
Monitoring frequency: 
Annual  
Design a ‘Green Credit 
Scheme ’ to incentivise 
employers to adopt a 
remote work policy to 
reduce work trips . 
 The governing 
bodies and 
regulators of the 
transport sector , 
along with the key 
finan ce-related 
stakeholders , 
should  jointly  
develop a policy 
that identifies and 
recommends ways 
to nudge  
institutions , 
agencies , private  
employers , etc., to 
promote adoption Not yet started /in 
preparatory stage/ 
partially implemented 
(indicate % 
implementation)/ 
implementation 
completed  Green Credit Scheme  - 
drafted, approved, and 
implemented  
 
 
Monitoring frequency: 
Per project  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   324  
Action  Activity  
(Only  example s are  given. 
More activities  may be  
required to implement an 
action .) Implementation 
status  Output indicators and 
data required  
of PT/NMT 
amongst their 
employees/staff  by 
providing financial 
incentives . The 
scope of this policy 
can be defined 
beyond the above 
and c an be 
designed to come 
up with a financial 
model to support 
PT and NMT 
operators (to 
provide services at 
an attractive cost) . 
This policy should 
be adopted by all 
employers in the 
city.  
Enforce shift to 
electric motor -driven 
systems from fossil 
fuel-driven ones  in all 
PAT and non-PAT 
industries.  Design 
improvements  of 
PAT  schemes . Not yet started /in 
preparatory stage/ 
partially implemented 
(indicate % 
implementation)/ 
implementation 
completed  % Increase in electric 
motor -driven systems in 
PAT and non-PAT  
 
Monitoring frequency: 
Annual  
Create attractive ticket 
fare structure with 
targeted incentives to 
attract more 
commuters to uptake 
PT modes , especially 
marginalised 
communities such as 
lower -income groups, 
women, elderly, and 
children.  Develop a 
comprehensive 
ticketing strategy 
for all PT modes in 
the city by 
involving all the 
service operators.  
This strategy 
should identify 
marginal ised 
communities and 
provide targeted 
incentives/subsidie
s to them . The 
strategy should also 
find ways to 
compensate PT 
oper ators for the 
subsidies they 
provide (this could 
be linked to the  Not yet started /in 
preparatory stage/ 
partially implemented 
(indicate % 
implementation)/ 
implementation 
completed  No. of passes issued for 
low-income groups, 
women , and the elderly  
 
Monitoring frequency: 
Quarterly  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   325  
Action  Activity  
(Only  example s are  given. 
More activities  may be  
required to implement an 
action .) Implementation 
status  Output indicators and 
data required  
proposed  Green 
Credit Scheme) . 
Note: The examples shown in the table are for illustration purpose s, and do not cover all the actions 
suggested under BCAP. For output indicators against each action, refer to sector -wise action tables 
in Chapter  5 
b) Climate action outcome monitoring:  
The purpose of measur ing outcome s is to understand whether a desired change is seen in a 
particular system compared to  its original state. For the BCAP, it would translate to a set of 
key performance indicators that can help measure the goals and targets adopted in each sector , 
as the collective outcome of a set of actions. Hence, while  it is often possible to attribute 
outcomes at the action level, in the case of the BCAP , the goals and targets will rather be 
achieved as the cumulative outcome of a range of actions. It is thus advisable to design an 
evaluation matrix at an appropriate level. For  the BCAP, a set of key performance indicators 
aligned to the sector goals or targets or action tracks (in the absence of a quantitative target 
for certain ambitions) for each sector can comprehensively help the city and sector agencies 
assess the impact of ac tions being implemented to achieve the goals and targets set for that 
sector. It is important to assess these KPIs at a sector level and not against individual actions 
so as to  avoid  inappropriately attribut ing success or failure. For example, mode shift in the 
transport sector would be a cumulative outcome from a range of actions under the particular 
action track or goal. Hence a set of KPIs for each sector has been derived from sectoral action 
tracks/goals/targets , which can help evaluate progress towards that target/action track as 
attached in  Annexure  F. The table below illustrate s a suggested template for evaluation against 
those KPIs.  
Table 21: Sample of BCAP action outcome monitoring template  
# Evaluating 
indicators  Target  Baseline 
value  
(Year)  Evaluation 
frequency  Value year  Change 
observed  Assessment 
(Satisfactory/ slow 
but positive 
change/ negative)  Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 
1 % New 
appliances with 
5-star label  40% by 
2030, 61% 
by 2040, 
83% by 
2050  2024  2 years        
2 % Annual 
reduction in 
physical air 
pollutants 
(PM10 & 
PM2.5) 
concentration 
from 2017 -18  40% by 
2026 for 
PM10 , 
30% by 
2026 for 
PM2.5 
(NCAP 
Targets)  2024  Half -
yearly        
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   326  
# Evaluating 
indicators  Target  Baseline 
value  
(Year)  Evaluation 
frequency  Value year  Change 
observed  Assessment 
(Satisfactory/ slow 
but positive 
change/ negative)  Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 
3 % of waste 
segregation at 
source  100% by 
2025  2019  1 year        
4 % reduction in 
water loss  15% by 
2030  2019  2 years        
5 % of new 
households in 
the city (added 
from 2019) in 
TOD areas 
(approx.)  20% by 
2030 , 
70% by 
2040 , 
90% by 
2050  2024  3 years       
 
 
 
c) BCAP impact monitoring:  
The objective of BCAP impact monitoring is to enable the city with data on a select set of 
overarching indicators to understand whether  the envisaged end goal of a climate action plan 
is being achieved at the city level. The overarching indicators and exercises through which 
impact will  be monitored are summarised  in the table below.  
Table 22: Indicators for BCAP impact monitoring  
Impact indicator  Tool/ activity  Frequency of 
measurement  Responsible nodal 
agency  
Reduction in annual GHG 
emissions from the city 
(CO2e)  Update GHG Inventory  
and monitor residual 
emissions  Every 2 years  Technical wing of 
CAC , with inputs from 
all departments  
Reduction in loss of lives, 
economy , and property 
annually due to climate - 
and environment -related 
hazards  Make and update loss and 
damage inventory for the 
city (loss of lives, property, 
assets, GDP, workdays 
from climate - and 
environment - related 
hazards)  Annual  BBMP , with inputs 
from ward - andzonal -
level platforms and 
other departments  
Reduction of risk to the 
city and its citizens from 
climate change  Climate change risk and 
vulnerability assessment  Every 3 -5 years  Technical wing of 
CAC with inputs from 
all departments  
 
It is important to acknowledge that while  GHG emission s inventory, loss and damage 
inventory and CCRA -VA provide useful estimates of change being achieved at an aggregate 
level, they do not provide a disaggregated understanding of where the city is falling short, or , 
in other words, attribute the city’s performance to a certain set of actions. A comprehensive 
outcome indicator matrix thus needs to be  laid out at a disaggregated level , to help agencies 
understand whether the desired outcome or impact is being achieved by implementing one or 
more set s of actions.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   327  
7.2 Evaluation  
Objective  
Evaluation can be defined as the ‘systematic and objective assessment of an ongoing or 
completed project, programme , or policy, as well as its design, implementation, and results. 
The aim is to determine the relevance and fulfilment of objectives, development efficiency, 
effectiveness, impact, and sustainability ’.67 Such assessments help agencies and cities make  
informed decisions on revising the allocation of resources and gain a deeper understanding of 
the actions that are underperforming. They  also help the city understand the level of support 
required from key stakeholder groups. The process of evaluation is built on the data collected 
for monitoring physical progress of activities, outputs , and outcomes, and is conducted 
periodically to answer questions such as ‘How and why did the change occur? Did it occur due 
to the action or other factor s? Why could the envisaged change not be achieved? ’ It is 
important to assess if sufficient and reliable data is collected in the monitoring phase befo re 
conducting the evaluation process.  
For BCAP, the evaluation will need to take into account all three categories or scales of 
monitoring, evaluate each one of them for their success , and importantly, carefully link the 
performance of all three levels of monitoring indicators to attribute observed changes. There 
is more than one way to conduct an evaluation from a methodological perspective. It is 
relatively easier to evaluate activities and outputs , as those are generally planned in a series of 
tangible deliverables in a results framework. Ou tcomes and impacts , however , are more 
complex functions , which have more than one line of attribution. He nce, it requires deeper 
scientific knowledge of causal loop s, established and emerging theories of change, and a deep 
understanding of the context.  
The aim of an evaluation exercise is to take note of the shift observed in the performance or 
outcome and impact indicators and trace the reason for that shift  in the value chain of activities 
as objectively as possible. Below  is an illustrative example of the flow of reasoning in an 
evaluation exercise.  
A mid -term evaluation of BCAP goals and targets will be done every three years 
based on insights provided by monitoring exercises described in the previous 
section. The goals and targets will be revised if required based on the evaluation 
exercise. The ent ire BCAP will be revisited every five years based on updated 
evidence and progress on goals set.  
 
67 The OECD defines evaluation as “The systematic and objective assessment of an ongoing or completed project, 
program, or policy, its design, implementation, and results. The aim is to determine the relevance and fulfilment 
of objectives, development efficiency, effectiveness, impact, and sustainability .”(OECD 2009)  
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   328  
Figure 75: Monitoring to evaluation reasoning flow -chart  
 
 Source: WRI India  
 
The outcome KPIs provided in Table 21, Annexure  F, and the impact indicators mentioned in 
Table 22 will provide useful reference points for designing evaluation approaches for BCAP 
sectoral actions.  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   329  
7.3 Reporting and learning  
There will be two levels of reporting . First , at the top stakeholder leadership level , where the 
progress of the proposed actions will be reported by the respective agencies to the nodal 
agency by recording the implementation status of actions with the help of the indicators, 
inventories and assessments suggested in monitoring and evaluation. The second is  the overall 
city-level reporting, which includes non -governmental agencies and citizens . Here, t he 
evaluation results will be tailored to the diverse audience group by providing updates on the 
city’s performance towards net zero, adaptation, and resilience goals.  
Publication of the GHG inventory, loss and damage inventory and CCRA -VA at prescribed 
frequencies are critical steps in awareness -building, creating informed discourse on climate 
change and accelerating climate actions with participation from both state and non -state 
stakeholders.  
A consistent and regular reporting process will allow BCAP to highlight its achievements in 
implementing climate action, while also identifying issues and opportunities to adapt and 
improve existing approaches. The CAC will update progress and achievements  on the actions 
in a manner that is comparable to the baseline year as well as the set targets. Regular reporting 
meetings with the CAC will be set, though recommended frequencies depend  on the audience 
and the actions being reported. Live dashboards will be enabled for the stakeholders to 
monitor progress against indicators at their leisure.  
7.4 Operational framework  for the BCAP -MER: Structures and tools 
This section gives a  broad schematic  of the processes, pro tocols , and institutional 
responsibilities  that will be put in place and operational ised for achieving  the objectives of 
MER.  The CAC will create detailed MER protocols, formats , and design of tools based on this 
framework , and in discussion with all key stakeholder departments , as the BCAP goes for 
implementation.  
Structures will include frameworks, roles, reporting systems, and communication channels, 
enabling objective -setting, data collection, analysis, and stakeholder communication. Tools 
will encompass methods for data collection (surveys, interviews, observations), progress 
monitoring, evaluation (impact assessments, case studies), and data analysis (statistical 
software, spreadsheets). Well -defined structures and appropriate tools improve the efficiency 
of MER, generating reliable information for decision -making and accountab ility.   
The box below illustrates two  case studies on the MER operational mechanisms adopted for 
climate action plans  in two cities.  
 
 
 
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   330  
Case Study 1: MER for Salvador Climate Action Plan  
The Brazilian city of Salvador has implemented a policy mandating the development of a 
management system for climate change mitigation and adaptation , enabling monitoring of 
plan implementation by a dedicated committee. Regular evaluations are conducted to assess 
measures, identify gaps, and make necessary adjustments. Action reviews occur at least every 
four years. Integration of climate data with oth er plans and programme s, such as the Smart 
City Technologies Master Plan and Data Salvador, enhances data accessibility and sharing. 
The plan incorporates specific indicators, including GHG  emission s reduction and renewable 
energy deployment, to measure performance. Reporting frameworks ensure transparent 
communication and stakeholder engagement throughout the process.  
Case  study 2: MER for Mumbai Climate Action Plan  
The Department of Environment and Climate Change in Brihanmumbai Municipal 
Corporation ( BMC ) encompasses seven verticals, one of which is Knowledge Management. 
Within this vertical, the MERL (Monitoring, Evaluation, Research, and Learning) cell is being  
established, consisting of a team of 24 climate officers representing the administrative wards 
and 11 departmental MER analysts linked to DMC offices within BMC. The Chief Scientist will 
lead the MERL cell, reporting to the DMC -Environment and the AMC -City. About Rs. 1 crore 
was allocated for the establishment of Climate Action Cell in February 2022. The cell’s 
responsibilities include biennial updates of the GHG inventory and climate risk assessment. 
The cell  will also monitor the progress of the Municipal Climate Action Plan (MCAP) against 
set targets, report on key performance indicators, and develop a system to capture learnings 
and progress.  A nodal officer is appointed to coordinate with the departments. A data 
monitoring template is being prepared to monitor the performance of the department on 
climate actions.  To ensure accountability and inclusivity, evaluations involving various 
stakeholders, including external organ isations and impacted communities, will be conducted 
every five years. The results will be published for transparency and used to revise the baselines, 
targets, and trajectories in MCAP. The climate cell will also update the GHG inventory and 
climate risk assessment every two years, monitoring the city - and sector -wide impacts of CAP 
implementation, including residual emissions in meeting the 2050 net -zero target. A progress 
report on MCAP will be prepared every three years, evaluating indicators at multiple levels, 
and an updated MCAP will be developed every five years to maintain focus on the 2050 net 
zero target.  
 
The Climate Action Cell will  be responsible for managing the MER operations of the BCAP , 
and an Officer for Data and Knowledge Management will be in  charge of the MER operations 
within the CAC. For the BCAP, the entire MER operational structure and tools will be designed 
based on three primary levels of MER operations , as follow s.  
1. Action level:  This will  be designed to monitor , evaluate and report  progress of 
specific actions  recommended under the BCAP  against their planned outputs  (see 
Table 20). The nodal officers for each sector in the CAC will coordinate with the 
departments/agencies responsible for a particular action to source necessary data, 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   331  
information , and documentation required for monitoring progress from time to time , 
and update the same in  the MER . The CAC should also put in place mechanisms to 
send updates on the progress of action to heads of agencies responsible for respective 
actions.  
 
2. Outcome level:  This is meant to moni tor the desired outcome of climate actions 
against a set of KPIs for each sector  (see Table 21). One nodal agency per sector can be 
identified , which will be responsible for collecting and collating data through primary 
and secondary sources  to measure outcome KPIs . This agency will coordinate with 
other agencies associated with that sector as required and share KPI data inputs with 
the sector nodal officer in the CAC. The CAC will also put in place mechanisms to send 
sector -wise updates on the performance of outcome indicators  to the heads of all 
stakeholder agencies  from time to time.  
 
3. Impact level:  This is meant for monitoring change s in the GHG footprint, climate 
change risks, and loss and damage  from climate hazards  that occur in the city  from 
time to time ( see Table 22). These activities (i.e., preparation of GHG inventory, CCRA -
VA, and loss and damage inventory)  are fairly technically heavy , time -consuming , and  
require their own sets of tools and methods . Hence, these activities will be anchored 
by the Technical Wing of the CAC. The  CAC will coordinate with the technical wing to 
source data against select indicators from these ex ercises and update the same in the 
MER  system .  
The MER platform will be operational ised as  a digital tool and will be managed by the Climate 
Action Cell . The data officer in the CAC  will be overall in  charge  of the MER platform . The 
MER platform should have different interfaces for different users , with different access 
protocols  such as below:  
1. Interface for entering data inputs and analys es to be primarily accessible  for 
CAC . 
2. Interface for tracking  action progress , outputs , and outcome KPI 
performances , a dashboard accessible to stakeholder department s. It should also 
send periodic notifications to heads of departments and senior executives on action 
and outcome KPIs   and highlight issues relating to non -performance . 
3. Public interface , a dashboard with select KPI performances (mainly impact 
indicators such as GHG emission s baseline, targets, risks, loss , and damage) to be 
commonly accessible by everyone .    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   332  
The figure below provides a  schematic  illustration of this operational framework . 
 
  
Figure 76 Schematic illustration of MER operations of the BCAP  
 
Source: As identified by BBMP with the technical support of WRI India  
 
It is to be noted that MER is a data -heavy process. Each stakeholder agency must identifi y a 
data officer in  charge for coordination on all such data requirements for updating GHG 
inventory, loss and damage inventory , and for assessment of sector -wise  KPIs. The nodal 
agencies responsible for sector -wise KPI evaluation will have to not only coordinate with 
relevant departments but make the process participatory to collect the inputs of external 
stakeholders such as community -based organ isations, NGOs, research agencies, and other 
groups affected by the action. This step is critical to understanding progress on implementing 
climate actions (measured outputs), and their real outcomes and impacts relative to goals and 
objectives.   

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   333  
 
 
 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   334  
8 WAY FORWARD  
 
The Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan is not an end in itself, but a step towards 
mainstreaming  climate action  in the  political, economic and civic discourse , that shape s the 
city’s future. A strong political commitment to governance and financing of the BCAP in its 
early years will largely determine its success in the long term. The a doption of the BCAP by 
diverse stakeholders will require institutional alignment, coherence,  and capacity across the 
decision -making  value chain. Preparation of the BCA P saw a three -pronged consultative 
exercise involving a diverse range of stakeholders, at every stage of the process . Supported by 
an evidence -based approach , the BCAP is not restricted to mere notional suggestions on what 
needs to happen in the city but adopts a more critical data/research lens. The BCAP lays out 
an actionable roadmap that city agencies and ward committees could use to carve out local ised 
interventions.  
The seven sectors that have been identified to orient actions  reflect  the existing institutional 
set-up of the city , as well as the strong  interdependencies certain sectors have on others. While 
such bucketing is useful for attributing action implementation responsibilities to one o r more 
agencies,  it is not sacrosanct and may need to be reoriented in line with future governance 
systems of the city as they  evolve.  
The identified  actions have been framed carefully to make them implementable. At the same 
time, some of the actions will require further detailing to make them fundable projects. This 
is an important step where the suggested Project Preparation Facility would play an important 
role and help align those projects to available sources of finance.  
Lastly, an informed discourse on city -level climate action is extremely critical for consensus -
building among st diverse actors  who  influenc e decisions and perception s but  who are not 
essentially aligned. It forms the foundation for a continuous process of dialogue and collective 
consensus -building that aims to make climate action a civic agenda by involving the bottom 
tier of government and other non -state local actors. Enabling access to resources and 
information on  the BCAP , and to platforms for participa tion, will help aid this process, bring 
transparency and accountability, and instil  a greater sense of ownership of climate actions 
among st citizens of Bengaluru.  
 
  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   335  
 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   336  
ANNEXURES  
  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   337  
A. List of stakeholder departments /agencies consulted   
 
1. Directorate of Urban Land Transport (DULT)  
2. Bengaluru Metro Rail Corporation Limited (BMRCL)  
3. Bengaluru Metropolitan Transport Corporation (BMTC)  
4. Transport department  
5. Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation (KSRTC)  
6. Rail Infrastructure Development Company  (Karnataka) Limited (KRIDE)  
7. Bengaluru traffic police department  
8. Bengaluru Police department  
9. Indian Institute of Science (IISc)  
10. Bangalore Water Supply & Sewerage Board (BWSSB)  
11. Ground Water Directorate (GWD)  
12. Water Resource Department (WRD)  
13. Urban Development Department  
14. Karnataka Forest Department  
15. Karnataka Biodiversity Board  
16. Environmental Management & Policy Research Institute (EMPRI)  
17. Bangalore Development Authority (BDA)  
18. Bangalore Electricity Supply Company Limited (BESCOM)  
19. Karnataka Power Corporation Limited (KPCL)  
20. Karnataka Power Transmission Corporation Limited (KPTCL)  
21. Petroleum Planning and Analysis Cell (PPAC)  
22. Karnataka Renewable Energy Development Limited (KREDL)  
23. GAIL (India) Limited  
24. Power Company of Karnataka Limited (PCKL)  
25. The Energy & Resources Institute (TERI)  
26. Karnataka Solar Power Development Corporation Limited (KSPDCL)  
27. Department of Industries and Commerce  
28. MSME Development Institute (DI)  
29. Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB)  
30. Commissionerate of health and family welfare  
31. Karnataka State Natural Disaster Monitoring Centre (KSNDMC)  
32. India Meteorological Department (IMD)  
33. District Disaster Management Authority (under Revenue Dept)  
34. Karnataka State Remote Sensing Applications Centre  (KSRSAC)  
35. Central Ground Water Board (CGWB)  
 
 
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   338  
List of participants in the expert consultation  
 
Session 1  
 
• Dr. A. Ravindra , Former Chief Secretary, Government of Karnataka  
• Dr. J. Srinivasan , Divecha Centre for Climate Change, Indian Institute of Science (IISc) 
(two articles on energy sent by email)  
• Dr. Kala Seetharam Sridhar , Professor, Institute for Social and Economic Change  
• Meera K. , Cofounder, Citizen Matters  
• Leo Saldanha , Coordinator, Environment Support Group  
• Aneesh Mugulur , Janaagraha  
• Dr. Krishna Raj , Professor, Institute for Social and Economic Change  
• Dr. Indu K. Murthy , Center for Study of Science, Technology and Policy (CSTEP)  
• Seema Mundoli , Azim Premji University  
• V. Ramprasad , Convenor of Friends of Lakes  
• Mahesh Kashyap , Air Pollution Expert  
• Vishwanath S. , Biome Trust  
• Jaya Dhindaw , Program Director, Integrated Urban Development, WRI India  
 
Session 2  
 
• Almitra Patel , National Expert, Swachh Bharat Mission; Member, Supreme Court 
Committee for Solid Waste Management  
• Shekhar Prabhakar , Hasiru Dala  
• Malini Parmar , Solid Waste Management Round Table (SWMRT)  
• Som Narayan,  Carbon Masters  
• Poonam Kasturi , Daily Dump  
• Sobia Rafiq , Sensing Local  
• Siddharth Hande , The Kabadiwala  
• V. Ramprasad , Convenor of Friends of Lakes  
• B.S. Shivprasad , The Engine Doc Energy Co.  
• Jaya Dhindaw , Program Director, Integrated Urban Development, WRI India  
 
Session 3  
 
• Dr. Lasya Gopal , Area Convener, Centre for Impact, Evaluation and Energy Access 
(CIEEAB) Bangalore, The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI)  
• Saptak Ghosh , Senior Policy Specialist, leads the Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy 
domain, CSTEP  
• Anurag Tamhankar , Director/Senior Architect, Biome Environmental Solutions  
• Kiran Bhagavatula , Senior Manager, Technology Informatics Design Endeavour (TIDE)  
• Salman Dawood , Governing Body Member, Confederation of Real Estate Developers 
Associations of India (CREDAI)  
• Deepak Krishnan , Associate Director, Energy Program, WRI India  
 
Session 4  
 
• Ashish Verma , IISc Sustainable Transportation Lab (IST Lab), IISc  
• Satya Sankaran , Founder Member, Urban Morph, Citizens For Sustainability (CiFoS) and 
Praja Research Analysis and Advocacy Group (Raag)  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   339  
• Shaheen Shasha , Bengaluru Bus Prayanikara Vedike (BBPV)  
• Dr. Vijay Kovvali,  IBI Group  
• Dr. Anjula Gurtoo , IISc  
• Dr. Vijayalakshmi,  Institute for Social and Economic Change (ISEC)  
• Sobia Rafiq , Sensing Local  
• Sudeept Maiti , Program Head, Transport, Sustainable Cities and Transport, WRI India  
 
Session 5  
 
• Dr. Pratima Singh , Research Scientist, CSTEP  
• Swagata Dey , Technical Advisor, Environmental Defense Fund  
• Dr. Pallavi Pant , Senior Scientist, Health Effects Institute  
• K.S. Aishwarya , Consultant, Climate Policy, Shakti Sustainable Energy Foundation  
• Mahesh Kashyap , Air Pollution Expert  
• Dr. Ajay Singh Nagpure, Program Head – Air Quality, WRI India  
 
Session 6  
 
• S. Vishwanath , Biome Environmental Trust  
• Shreya Nath , Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment (ATREE)  
• P.G. Ganapathy , Wipro Foundation  
• Thippeswamy Matada Nagendraiah , Independent consultant; ex -Chief Engineer, 
Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board (BWSSB)  
• Dinni Lingaraj , Bangalore Sustainability Forum and Wipro Foundation  
• Vikas Brahmavar , Boson White Water  
• Almitra Patel , National Expert, Swachh Bharat Mission; Member, Supreme Court 
Committee for Solid Waste Management  
• Sahana Goswami , Senior Program Manager, WRI India  
 
Session 7  
 
• Dr. H.S. Sudhira , Gubbi Labs  
• Dr. Anjali Mohan , Integrated Design  
• Brinda Sastry , Adjunct Faculty, R V School of Architecture  
• Dr. Champaka Rajagopal , Visiting faculty, Azim Premji University  
• Suhail Rahman , MD & CEO, CoEvolve Estates and Governing Body Member of CREDAI  
• Dr. Harini Nagendra , Azim Premji University (sent comments by email)  
• Dr. Priya Narayanan , Program Manager – Urban Forestry, WRI India  
• Jaya Dhindaw , Program Director, Integrated Urban Development, WRI India  
 
 
Other exper ts con sulted  during the BCAP preparation process  
• Kathyayini Cham araj, Executive Trustee , CIVIC (sent comments by email)  
  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   340  
B.  GHG emission inventory  
B.1. GHG accounting and reporting standards for cities  
GHG and Global Warming Potential (GWP)  
GHG is any gas compound in the atmosphere that is capable of absorbing infrared radiation 
and trapping heat. GHGs are responsible for the greenhouse effect , leading to global warming 
and climate change. Human activities result in increased GHG emissions. Every greenhouse 
gas has a  global warming potential  (GWP), which is a measure of how much heat the GHG can 
trap within the atmosphere and how much of an environmental impact it is expected to have. 
The GWP and the abundance of these gases staying in the atm osphere influence climate 
change   (Connection 2014) . 
Table 23 provides the GWP as per 5AR.  
Table 23: GHG and GWP as per 5AR  
Name of the GHG  GWP (5AR)  
Carbon Dioxide (CO2)  1 
Methane (CH4)  28 
Nitrous Oxide (N2O)  265 
Source: Global Protocol for Community -Scale Greenhouse Gas Emission Inventories ( GHG -GPC)  
 
Every GHG has a different GWP, due to which it is difficult to rely on the typical air emission 
report to calculate the total GHG output. So, in order to calculate the emissions for the GHG  
inventory, conversion of the warming impact of the GHGs into one single metric is 
recommended. This is called the carbon dioxide equivalent (CO 2e) (Rabo 2020) . The formula 
of CO 2e is mentioned below in  Equation 1. 
Equation 1: CO2 equivalent  
CO 2e =GHG x GWP  
Here GHGs are – CO2, CH4, and N2O, which means - (mass of CO2 emitted x its GWP)+(  mass of 
CH4 emitted x its GWP) + (mass of N2O emitted x its GWP)  
GHG inventory operational boundaries  
Scope framework:  The GPC requires cities to report their emissions attributable to 
activities taking place within the geographic boundary of the city by categor ising the emission 
sources into boundary sources. As per the GPC protocol, emissions are categor ised into three 
scopes, as seen in   
 
 
Table 24. 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   341  
 
 
 
Table 24: Categor isation of emissions by scope  
 
Source: Global Protocol for Community -Scale Greenhouse Gas Emission Inventories ( GHG -GPC)  
 
GHG reporting requirement  
The framework provides two reporting levels demonstrating different levels of completeness 
as shown in Table 25 below.  
Table 25: GPC framework reporting levels  
 •GHG emissions from sources located within the city boundaryScope 1 (Direct emissions)
•GHG emissions resulting from the use of grid -supplied electricity, steam, heating 
and/or cooling within the city boundaryScope 2 (Indirect emissions)
•All other GHG emissions that occur outside the city boundary as a result of activities 
taking place within the city boundary.Scope 3 (Indirect emissions)
Scope 1:
Stationary Energy, 
Transportation and 
Waste (solid waste 
and wastewater)
Scope 2:
Energy and 
Transportation
Scope 3:
Exported wasteBASIC 
LEVELScope 1:
Industrial Processes 
and Product Use 
(IPPU)
Scope 2:
Agriculture, 
Forestry and Other 
Landuse (AFOLU)
Scope 3:
Stationary Energy 
and Transportation BASIC+ 
LEVEL
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   342  
Source: Global Protocol for Community -Scale Greenhouse Gas Emission Inventories ( GHG -GPC)  
 
GHG emission sources  
The GPC identifies the sectors that should be applied to classify the GHG emission from cities 
as shown in Table 26 below.  
Table 26: Sectors and sub -sectors  
Sector  Sub -sector  
Stationary Energy and  
buildings  Residential buildings  
Commercial and institutional buildings and facilities  
Manufacturing industries and construction  
Energy industries  
Agriculture, forestry and fishing activities  
Non -specified sources  
Fugitive emissions from mining, processing, storage and transport  
of coal  
Fugitive emissions for oil and natural gas systems  
Transport  On-road Transport  
Railways  
Waterborne navigation  
Aviation  
Off-road Transport  
Waste  Solid waste disposal at the landfill  
Biological treatment of waste  
Incineration and open burning  
Wastewater treatment and discharge (Domestic and Industrial)  
Industrial processes and 
product use (IPPU)  Industrial processes  
Product use  
Agriculture, Forestry and 
Other Land Use (AFOLU)  
 Livestock  
Land  
Aggregate sources and non -CO2 emission sources on land  
Other Scope 3  
Source: Global Protocol for Community -Scale Greenhouse Gas Emission Inventories ( GHG -GPC)  
 
GHG emission inventory methodology  
Emission calculation methodologies define the calculation formulas and necessary activity 
data and emission factors to determine total emissions from specified activities. The formula 
for calculating GHG emissions as per GPC is given in Equation 2. 
Equation 2: GHG emission calculation  
GHG emissions = Activity data x Emission factor  
 
Here,  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   343  
• Activity data is a quantitative measure of a level of activity that results in GHG 
emissions taking place during a given period (e.g., the volume of gas used, kilometres 
driven, tonnes of solid waste sent to landfill, etc.)   
• An emission factor is a measure of the mass of GHG emissions relative to a unit of 
activity. Emission factors should be relevant to the inventory boundary, specific to the 
activity being measured, and sourced from credible government, industry, or academic  
sources. Emission factors may be activity -based, or life cycle -based.  
B.2 Detailed Methodology of Sector -wise GHG Emission Calculations  
 
Stationary Energy  
Scope and  Methodology  
General overview of activity data and emission factors used that was appropriate for Stationary 
Energy sector was based on The Global Protocol for Community -Scale Greenhouse Gas 
Emission Inventories (GPC). GPC is a robust and clear framework that builds on  existing 
methodologies for calculating and reporting city -wide GHG emissions  (GPC GHG 2014) .  
Table 27: Methodology Reference  
Sector  Emission 
Sources  Scope  Approaches  Activity 
Data  Emission 
Factors  
Stationary 
Energy  Fuel consumption 
within BBMP 
boundary  1 Fuel 
consumption  Amount of 
fuel 
consumption  Mass GHG 
emissions per unit 
of fuel  
Consumption of 
grid supplied 
electricity within 
BBMP boundary  2 Grid electricity 
consumption  Amount of 
grid supplied 
electricity 
consumption  Mass GHG 
emissions per unit 
of grid supplied 
(Grid specific 
emission factor)  
 
The GHG emissions from stationary energy is estimated by multiplying the activity data by an 
emission factor associated with the activity being measured as depicted in the above table. 
GHG emission estimation depends on the quantity and quality of data that are made available.  
𝑮𝑯𝑮  𝑬𝒎𝒊𝒔𝒔𝒊𝒐𝒏𝒔 =𝑨𝒄𝒕𝒊𝒗𝒊𝒕𝒚  𝑿 𝑬𝒎𝒊𝒔𝒔𝒊𝒐𝒏  𝑭𝒂𝒄𝒕𝒐𝒓  
Activity Data  
The activity data was collected from three key agencies, BESCOM, PPAC, and GAIL. BESCOM 
is the distributor of the grid -electricity and GAIL is the supplier of the PNG and CNG. PPAC is 
the authentic official source for data on hydrocarbon sector in India and provide s data on 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   344  
different types of fuel supplied in TMT68 for Bengaluru Urban District. With the help of 
CSTEP’s research paper CSTEP -RR-2022 -4 (CSTEP 2022)  we have gathered information on 
consumption of wood and charcoal/coal in Bengaluru.  
All the activity data collected were aligning with the defined inventory period 2019 . However , 
some activity data were not aligning with the defined inventory boundary. In this scenario, the 
data was adapted to meet the inventory boundary by adjusting for changes in the activity using 
a scaling factor. For instance, data provided by PPAC, and GAIL w as for Bengaluru Urban 
District, and this was adapted to meet the inventory boundary using a suitable scaling 
methodology to scale down the data from Bengaluru U rban District to the BBMP boundary.  
Population is one of the most common factors used to scale data because, in the absence of 
major technological and behavioural changes, the number of people is a key driver of GHG 
emissions, particularly in the residential sector. Whereas, to scale down th e data pertaining to 
manufacturing industries and construction sector, the number of employees was considered. 
Data sets used for scaling methodology were estimated 2019 BBMP population and employee 
data from district industries centre.   
Scaling methodologies were employed only in the scope 1 emission category , while  for scope 
2, i.e., consumption of grid electricity, the data was furnished and i f not aligned with 100% 
accuracy but was closely aligned to BBMP boundary by BESCOM. Hence, no down scaling was 
considered for the data pertaining to scope 2 category.  
Emission Factor  
Emission factors should be relevant to the inventory boundary, specific to the activity being 
measured, and sourced from credible government, industry, or academic sources. If no local, 
regional, or country -specific sources are available, cities should use IPCC default emission 
factors or data from the Emission Factor Database (IPCC 2021) .  
Similarly, for Bengaluru GHG inventory there were no country -specific emission factors and 
it was necessary  to rely on default IPCC emission factors. However, the emission factor for 
grid electricity has been calculated by the WRI and C40 team as the BESCOM had a good 
energy mix , and BESCOM was importing only an average of 26% electricity from the national 
grid in 2019. The table  below  lists all the emission factors used to calculate the GHG emissions 
for all activities included in the Bengaluru GHG invento ry. The GWP value from the fifth 
assessment report (AR5) is used to convert quantities of GHGs  to a shared unit (carbon dioxide 
equivalent, CO 2e) for direct comparison.  
Table 28: Emission Factors used to Calculate Scope 1  GHG emissions  
Fuel 
Type / 
Activity  Sectors  Default Emission 
Factors in Kg/TJ  Remarks  
CO 2 CH 4 N2O 
LPG  Residential, Commercial / 
Institutional  63,100  5 0.1 - 
 
68 TMT is Thousand Metric Tonnes  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   345  
Fuel 
Type / 
Activity  Sectors  Default Emission 
Factors in Kg/TJ  Remarks  
CO 2 CH 4 N2O 
Manufacturing Industries and 
Construction  63,100  1 0.1 - 
PNG  Residential, Commercial / 
Institutional  56,100  5 0.1 - 
Manufacturing Industries and 
Construction  56,100  1 0.1 - 
Petrol  Residential, Commercial / 
Institutional  69,300  10 0.6 - 
Diesel Oil  Residential, Commercial / 
Institutional  74,100  10 0.6 - 
Manufacturing Industries and 
Construction  74,100  3 0.6 - 
Kerosene  Residential, Commercial / 
Institutional  71,900  10 0.6 - 
LNG  Manufacturing Industries and 
Construction  64,200  3 0.6 - 
Residual 
Fuel Oil  Manufacturing Industries and 
Construction  77,400  3 0.6 - 
Charcoal  Residential, Commercial / 
Institutional  * 200 1 (*) is not included in 
the total GHG 
emissions. As per GPC 
guideline, biogenic 
CO2  shall be reported 
separately.  
Wood  Residential, Commercial / 
Institutional  * 300 4 (*) is not included in 
the total GHG 
emissions. As per GPC 
guideline, biogenic 
CO2  shall be reported 
separately.  
Source: 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories - Chapter 2: Stationary Combustion  
 
Table 29: Emission Factors used to Calculate Scope 2 GHG emissions  
Fuel Type / 
Activity  Sectors  Calculated Emission 
Factor in Kg/kWh  Remarks  
CO 2e 
Electricity  All sub -
sectors  0.6984  Emission factor for BESCOM grid 
electricity has been calculated by 
WRI India and C40 team  
 
 
Limitation s 
• Gathered fuel data from PPAC was for Bengaluru Urban District and had to  be scale d 
down it to BBMP boundary.  
• Census data is available only until 2011 and the population 2019 was estimated and the 
same was used for scaling methodology.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   346  
• Limited information on the open access consumer and their respective supplier 
information. Hence, they are categorised in non -specified sources.  
• Wood consumption by crematoria  has been excluded due to lack of data.  
Validation  
During April 2022, BBMP had organ ised Departmental Convenings to review the GHG 
Emissions Inventory. The authors had presented the methodology and results of the stationary 
energy sector, which were validated by the departments, BESCOM, GAIL, and PPAC.  
Results  
The s tationary energy sector accounts for 68% of total city GHG emissions , i.e., 1,28,39,662 
metric tonnes CO 2e, and the contribution s from its sub -sectors are listed in Table 30 below.  
Table 30: Stationary Energy sector ’s GHG emissions  
S.No.  Sub -Sectors  GHG emissions in metric tonnes CO 2e 
1 Residential Buildings  49,74,844  
2 Commercial and institutional buildings  49,14,976  
3 Manufacturing industries and construction  11,37,093  
4 Non -specified sources  18,12,749  
Source: WRI Analysis based on Global Protocol for Community -Scale Greenhouse Gas Emission Inventories 
(GHG -GPC)  
 
 
The major activity contributing to the GHG emission s in this sector is shown in the below 
Figure 77. 
 
Figure 77: Key Activity contributing GHG emissions  in Stationary Energy Sector  
 
Source: WRI Analysis based on Global Protocol for Community -Scale Greenhouse Gas Emission Inventories 
(GHG -GPC)  
 
 
  14%
86%Fuel consumption
Grid Electricty
consumption
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   347  
Transport  
Scope of the sector  
The GPC categor ises emission sources in the transport  sector by transit mode . The modes are:  
on-road transport , railway s, water -borne transport , aviation, and off -road transport . The city 
should identify the applicable transit modes and report emissions for these based on data 
available. GPC groups emissions into three categories based on where the y occur . These 
categories are the three scopes mentioned in  Table 31. For the BASIC reporting framework 
followed in Bengaluru , the city shall report all GHG emissions from combustion of fuels in 
transport  occurring within the its boundary in scope 1; and GHG emissions from grid -supplied 
electricity used for transport  within the city boundary for transport  in scope 2.  
For Bengaluru  the transit modes applicable  are on -road transport , railway s, and aviation.  
However, the aviation sub -sector is not considered in this GHG inventory , as the Bengaluru 
International Airport is situated outside the study area i.e., BBMP jurisdiction  (and it falls in 
scope 3 category , which is not considered in the BASIC reporting framework ). Bengaluru 
doesn’t have a suburban railway system at present and the share of city’s population using 
railways as an intra -city mode of commute is very small . Considering this, the ‘ railways’ 
category for this inventory includes only the Metro.  Table 31 summar ises the scope of 
transport sector in this GHG inventory for Bengaluru.  
Table 31 Scope of Transport Sector  for Bengaluru’s  GHG Inventory  
Emission Source - 
Transport  Scope 1  
(From fuel 
combustion for 
transport occurring 
in the city)  Scope 2  
(From consumption of 
grid -supplied energy 
for in -boundary 
transport ) Scope 3  
(From portion of 
transboundary journeys 
occurring outside the city, and 
transmission and distribution 
losses from grid supplied - 
energy)  
On-Road Transport  Yes Yes No 
Railways (only metro included)  Yes Yes No 
Water Transport  Not Applicable  Not Applicable  No 
Aviation  Not Applicable  Not Applicable  No 
Off-Road Transport  Not Applicable  Not Applicable  No 
Source: WRI Analysis based on  Global Protocol for Community -Scale Greenhouse Gas Emission Inventories 
(GHG -GPC)  
Legend:  
Yes Included in the inventory  
Not Applicable  Not applicable to Study Area  
No Not included in the Basic reporting framework  
 
 
 
Railway System in Bengaluru:  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   348  
• Bengaluru doesn’t have a Suburban Railway system at present. The Bengaluru Suburban Rail 
Project (BSRP) is an upcoming project , implemented by Rail Infrastructure Development 
Company (Karnataka) Limited (K -RIDE).  
• At present there are 22 Railway Stations within BBMP area extending from:  
o Kengeri to Whitefield (in the East -West direction; length is approx. 35 km) 
o Yelahanka Jn, Chikkabanavara to Carmelaram  (in the North -South Direction; length 
is approx. 33 km) 
• For the FY 2019 -20, only 16% of the passenger trips within Bangalore Railway Division 
covers a trip distance below ( and equal to) 35  km. Trip distance of rest of the trips are 
more than 35 km69. 
• Additionally, Bangalore Railway Division – the area to which the above data corresponds  – is 
vast compared to the BBMP area (which covers other towns and cities).  
• These implies that the 16% of passenger trip distance which covers 35  km or less is not the 
figure for the BBMP area specifically. From this,  it can  be assumed that for BBMP area this 
figure will be much lower than 16%. Hence, the share of population using Railways as a mode 
of intra -city commute within BBMP limits is very low. 
 
Approach  
The methodologies for estimating transport emissions can be broadl y categor ised as top -down 
and bottom -up approaches.  
• Top -down  approaches start with fuel consumption as a proxy for travel behaviour . 
Here, emissions are the result of total fuel sold multiplied by a GHG emission factor 
for each fuel.  
• Bottom -up approaches begin with detailed activity data. Bottom -up approaches 
generally rely on an ASIF framework for determining total emissions (see  Figure 78). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 78 ASIF Framework  
 
69 Based on the RTI response (No. C. 180/RTI/Corres. 130/AM/2021 -22) on distance slab -wise detail of net 
tickets issued ( suburban /non-suburban) in UTS Report of Bangalore Division financial year 2019 -2020  
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   349  
 
Source: Global Protocol for Community -Scale Greenhouse Gas Emission Inventories ( GHG -GPC)  
 
Figure 79 illustrates  the type s of transport  activity reflected in each of the above methods.  Fuel 
sales method is a top-down approach . The bottom -up approach includes: 1) Induced  Activity , 
2) Geographic  and 3) Resident Activity methods.  The method s followed for calculating GHG 
emissions for the modes considered in Bengaluru’s GHG inventory are:  
• Fuel Sales Method  for Railways , and  
• Induced Activity Method  for On -Road Transport  
Figure 79 Methodology system boundaries  
 
Source: Global Protocol for Community -Scale Greenhouse Gas Emission Inventories ( GHG -GPC)  
Methodology  
1. Formula:  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   350  
In general, emission s are calculated by multiplying ‘Activity Data’ with  respective  ‘Emission 
Factor’.   
For Fuel Sales( /consumption ) Method , the following formula  (Equation 3) was applied:  
Equation 3 Emission calculation using Fuel Sales Method  
 
Source: (T. V. Ramachandra and Shwetmala 2009)  
 
For Induced Activity Method , the formula  given below  (Equation 4) is applicable. However,  
since the re w ere challenge s in arriving at the ‘Vehicle based’ Emission Factor s for all  vehicle  
categories , the VKT70 for modes were converted to corresponding fuel consumed . This volume 
of fuel consumed was then multiplied with the ‘Fuel based’ Emission Factor  to arrive at the 
emissions from On -Road Transport . 
Equation 4 Emission calculation using Activity Method  
 
Source: (T. V. Ramachandra and Shwetmala 2009)  
 
2. Data Sources  and Limitations : 
Data on transport activity  and fuel consumption w ere arrived at  based on the following 
sources:  
• Comprehensive Mobility Plan for Bengaluru, 2020  (CMP)  
• Vehicle registration data from  the Parivahan portal of the Transport Department  
• Google Environmental Insights Explorer  (EIE)  
• Primary data provided by BMRCL and BMTC  
 
70 Vehicle Kilometres Travelled  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   351  
• Secondary sources  (published reports and papers)  
The fuel-based emission factors  considered here are given in Table 32. 
Table 32 Emission factors used for calculat ing transport sector GHG emission s 
Fuel Type / Activity  Default Emission Factors in Kg/TJ  
CO 2 CH 4 N2O 
Diesel  74,100  10 0.6 
Petrol  69,300  10 0.6 
CNG  56,100  5 0.1 
LPG  63,100  5 0.1 
Electricity   
Electric  vehicular modes  (on-road and railway -metro ) are powered 
by electricity generated at stationary power plants as well as other 
sources . Hence, the emissions factor for this will be same as th at of 
Stationary Energy sector (refer to Stationary Energy section for the 
factors ) 
 
Source: 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories - Chapter 2: Stationary Combustion and 
Chapter 3: Mobile Combustion  
 
Since data required were taken from multiple sources, there were  few limitations i n the 
datasets . The year and the area for whi ch the data was sourced were different for each of the 
sources ( Table 33 depicts this) . Additionally, the nomenclature of vehicle modes were  different  
in each of the sources. These were tackled by adopting the  most pragmatic way such as 
extracting data for RTOs within BBMP boundaries , following the  nomenclature pre scribed by 
the CMP , proportionately scaling the values down to CAP study area  and similar.  
Table 33 Features of Data Sources  
Data Source  Data/Study Area  Data Year  
CAP requirement  BBMP  2019  
CMP  BMA*  2016  
Parivahan portal  
(Transport 
Department ) RTOs  Till date  
(year -wise data available)  
Google EIE  (1,649.252 km2 ) 2019  
Source: Compiled by WRI India  
 
3. Methodology:  
The steps involved  in calculating the GHG emissions from  Bengaluru’s  transport sector  are 
given in Table 34 below . 
 
Table 34 Methodology adopted for calculating transport sector GHG  emissions for Bengaluru  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   352  
Step No.  Description  Data Sources  
Step 1:  Arrive at the Total no. of trips for each mode  EIE, CM P 
Step 2:  Arrive at Average Trip Length  for all modes  CMP  
Step 3:  Calculate the Annual VKT  for each mode  
[VKT = No. of Trips for each mode x Average  Trip Length]  EIE, CMP , primary data 
from BMRCL and 
BMTC  
Step 4:  Distribute the Annual VKT for each mode into different fuel 
categories with each mode  Parivahan portal  
Step 5:  Arriving at fuel efficiencies for all modes (based on fuel 
type)  Secondary sources – 
Literature review, 
market estimates, 
international proxies  
Step 6:  Calculating the Total Fuel Consumed by each mode (based 
on fuel type)  
[Total Fuel Consumption = Annual VKT each mode (with 
Fuel breakup) ÷ Fuel Efficiency (for each category )] Calculations based on 
above sources; primary 
data from BMRCL and 
BMTC  
Step 7:  Calculating emissions f or each mode  (based on fuel type)  
using CIRIS tool  
[Emissions = Total Fuel Consumption * Emission Factors ] Calculations based on 
above sources  
Source: WRI India Analysis  
 
4. Validation:  
The methodology and results were validated by Prof. Ashish Verma  (Indian Institute of 
Science, Bengaluru) , who co -authored the Climatrans  study  (Verma, Vajjarapu, Hemanthini 
2018)71. The author also validated the results at intermediate stages with published studies 
and reports72. During April -May 2022, BBMP had organ ised Departmental Convenings to 
review the GHG Emission s Inventory. The author had presented the methodology and results  
of the transport sector , which were validated by the departments73. 
Results  
The total GHG emissions from Bengaluru’s transport sector are 3.87 MMT  CO 2e for 2019 . 
On-road transport  is responsible for 98% of this  and Railways are responsible for  the 
remaining 2% of the transport sector emissions  (refer  to Table 35). Analysing the mode -wise 
contributors, it is the diesel -run freight, petrol -run motorcycle and diesel -run buses which are 
the major emitters. Figure 80 illustrate s this.  
Table 35 Transport sector GHG emissions  
Sub -Sectors  GHG emissions in metric tonnes 
CO2e  
On-road transport  38,00,004  
Railways  74,861  
TOTAL  38,74,865  
 
71 Climatrans  was the only other study that calculated Bengaluru’s transport sector emissions based on 2008 data 
for BMR. This was referred to by the authors to validate the VKT and emissions.  
72 VKT calculated was cross checked by validating with other published studies/reports such as Climatrans paper, 
Emissions data published by Google EIE, Bangalore Mobility Indicator, CTTS.   
73 BMRCL, BMTC, Transport Department, DULT  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   353  
Source: WRI India analysis for BBMP jurisdiction based on GHG -GPC framework  
 
Figure 80 Mode -wise contributors of transport sector emissions (in MMT  CO 2e) 
 
Source: WRI India analysis for BBMP jurisdiction based on GHG -GPC framework  
 
 
  
Petrol -
Motorcycle , 1.21 , 
31%
Petrol -Car, 0.19 , 
5%
Diesel -Car, 0.08 , 
2% Diesel -Bus, 0.65 , 
17%Diesel -Freight , 
1.61 , 42%Electricity -Metro , 
0.07 , 2%Others , 0.06 , 1%
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   354  
Waste  
Scope of the sector  
Waste management contributes to GHG emissions in the form of CH4, N2O , and CO2 gases 
due to activities like collection, treatment and disposal of solid waste and wastewater. Methane 
is responsible for around 30% of the current rise in global temperature (IEA 2022)  Landfills 
contribute to higher methane emissions due to the anaerobic decay of organic material in 
landfills. Large historic methane emission reductions reported to the United Nations 
Framework on Climate Change Convention (UNFCCC) have been related to landfills.  his 
shows that presence of biodegradable waste in the municipal solid waste landfills is the major 
contributor if methane emissions. Hence, there is a need to reduce emissions from landfills 
that contribute to most of the methane emissions from th e waste sector. Wastewater emissions 
are due to aerobic treatment and discharge of untreated water. Hence, to understand the scale 
of emissions from the waste sector in Bengaluru, the emissions from municipal solid waste 
(major focus on biodegradable waste) and domestic wastewater treatment methods and 
discharge were assessed for the preparation of GHG emission inventory. This inventory is 
prepared in accordance with “The Global Protocol for Community -Scale Greenhouse Gas 
Emission Invento ries (GPC)” The emi ssion sources and approach categor ised in the GPC for 
waste sector are considered to prepare the inventory for Bengaluru city.  
Table 36: The emission sources and approach categorised in the GPC for waste sector:  
Emission source  Scope  Approach  Activity data  Emission factor  
Solid waste  
disposal into 
landfills  1 Methane 
commitment 
method  Amount of waste 
received at landfill 
sites and its 
composition  Methane generation 
potential of the waste  
Biological 
treatment of solid 
waste  1 Waste composition 
approach  Mass of organic waste 
treated  Mass GHG emission 
per unit of organic 
waste treated, by 
treatment type  
Incineration and 
Open Burning  3 Waste composition 
approach  Mass of waste 
incinerated  Oxidation factor, by 
type of treatment  
Domestic 
wastewater 
treatment and 
discharge  1 Organic content -
based approach  The organic content 
of wastewater per 
treatment  Emission generation 
potential of such 
treatment type  
 
The scopes mentioned in the above table are categorised based on the scope framework 
mentioned in the Chapter  2. Bengaluru waste sector GHG emission inventory is based on the 
BASIC reporting framework provided by GPC.  The GHG emissions from waste sector are 
estimated by multiplying the activity data by an emission factor associated with the activity 
being measured as depicted in the above table. GHG emission estimation depends on the 
quantity and quality of data that are made available.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   355  
Activity data  
The GHG emission inventory is prepared in line to the reporting tool requirements of the waste 
sector for Bengaluru city. The activity data requirements in the reporting tool focuses on 
municipal solid waste disposal to landfill, biological treatment of wa ste, incineration or open 
burning of waste and wastewater treatment and open discharge. Hence, the data collection for 
the emission inventory was focused on reporting tool requirements alone. No o ther sub -sector 
beyond the above -mentioned sub sectors was considered.  
Data inclusions  
• Municipal solid waste generated within the city is considered for emission inventory. 
The definition and components of municipal solid waste mentioned in the GPC that is 
consistent with IPCC guidelines only are considered for the inventory . 
• Composting and Anaerobic  digestion of biodegradable waste.  
• Clinical waste and hazardous waste incineration   
• Domestic wastewater generated in the city. This includes waste water being treated in 
the public STPs and untreated water discharge.  
• Census data is available only until 2011 and the population 2019 was estimated and the 
same was used  
• Only public STPs data was available to perform domestic wastewater treatment 
inventory.  
Data exclusions  
• Any other waste beyond what is mentioned in the data inclusion is excluded from the 
GHG emission inventory  due to a lack of substantial emissions from other wastes. Also, 
legacy waste disposal is not included as the inventory is prepared for annual generation 
alone.  
• As the city does not have solid waste incineration, this is excluded. As there is no 
substantial data on sewage sludge and fossil liquid, these have not been attempted. As 
per BBMP, there is no open dump of waste with in the BBMP boundary, hence this is 
not considered.  
• Industrial waste water treatment was not considered because to perform industrial 
wastewater emission estimates, total product production per annum, COD per annum, 
CH4 recovery, sludge removal and treatment methods etc. of each industry with in the 
city wa s required and the date for each component could not be made available.  
Without even a single component, the inventory could not be performed in the 
reporting tool due to its standard mandatory requirements.   
Data points considered for the GHG emission inventory are provided in the Table 37 
Table 37: Data points considered for the GHG emission inventory  
Sub -sector  Component  Data point  Source  
Solid  waste   
disposal into 
landfills  Solid waste 
disposed into the 
landfill  2363 Tons per day (TPD) (43.76% of 
total waste generated)  
(includes bulk waste generators)  BBMP, 2019  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   356  
Solid waste 
composition  Vegetable waste – 35%  
Garden/park waste – 26%  
Plastic – 12%  
Paper – 8% 
Debris – 5% 
Textiles – 4% 
Cardboard – 4% 
Glass – 3% 
Sanitary – 2% 
Rejects – 1% (Naveen and 
Puvvadi 2020)  
Type of Landfill  Uncategor ised 
Only one active landfill in 
Mitaganahalli, Bengaluru (quarry pit 
with lack of scientific gas capture)  IPCC guidelines, 
Chapter -3 
Biological waste 
treatment  Total wet waste 
generated  3294TPD (61% of total waste 
generated)  
(includes bulk waste generators)  BBMP, 2019  
Composting  1933TPD  BBMP, 2019  
Anaerobic 
digestion  35 TPD  BBMP, 2019  
Incineration and 
open burning  Clinical waste 
incineration  34.6 TPD  KSPCB, 2019  
Hazardous waste 
incineration  13.3 TPD  KSPCB, 2019  
Domestic 
wastewater 
treatment and 
open discharge  Wastewater 
treatment  64%  BWSSB, 2019  
 Untreated 
wastewater 
discharge  36%  BWSSB, 2019  
 Predominant 
treatment method  Aerobic treatment (well managed)   
 
GHG sources and sinks  
As per GPC requirements,  
o Solid waste disposed into the landfill leads to emissions driven by increasing 
population with higher waste generation, changing waste composition and lack of 
scientific landfill with gas capture. Wet waste predominantly contributes to GHG 
emissions and without scientific landfill gas capture, the emissions from the landfills 
are higher as 24.55% of total 43.76%  of landfill waste is wet waste in Bengaluru.  
o The biological treatment of waste refers to composting and anaerobic digestion of 
organic waste, such as food waste, garden and park waste, sludge, and other organic 
waste sources. Biological treatment of solid waste reduces overall waste volume for 
final disposal (in landfill or incineration) and reduces the toxicity of the waste.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   357  
o Incineration is a controlled, industrial process, often with energy recovery where 
inputs and emissions can be measured and data is often available and refers to clinical, 
industrial, solid waste , sewage sludge, fossil liquid. By contrast, open burning is an 
uncontrolled, often illicit process with different emissions and can typically only be 
estimated based on collection rates. Compared to solid waste  disposal, incineration has 
lesser GHG emissions.  
o Domestic wastewater and discharge leads to emissions driven by increasing 
population, lack of adequate management of aerobic treatment and wastewater 
discharge ( untreated), septic tanks etc.  
Predominant GHG: T he reporting tool analyses three predominant GHGs : methane (CH 4), 
nitrous oxide ( N2O) and carbon dioxide (CO 2).  
Emission factor  
As there are no specific emission factors, standards or related coefficients for emission 
calculation for Bengaluru city/state wide/nationwide, the emission estimates were prepared 
using the reporting tool (CIRIS) by relying on the GPC and default IPCC Guidelines, Volume -
5: Waste (IPCC 2006), Chapters -3, 4, 5 and 6 respectively.    
Validation  
 In the month of April -May 2022, BBMP had organ ised Departmental Convenings to review 
the GHG emissions inventory for waste sector. The authors had presented the methodology 
and results of the waste sector to respective agencies for validation. BBMP acknowledged the 
inventory and BWSSB has validated the inventory. KSPCB requested to submit a detailed 
methodology of the inventory. The methodology was prepared by the  author, reviewed by C40 
cities and was submitted to KSPCB.  
Results  
The waste sector contributes to about 2.02 million metric tonnes of CO 2e (which is 11 percent 
of the total GHG emissions of the city). Table 38 provides the waste sector emissions in 
Bengaluru, 2019.  
Table 38: Outline of waste sector emissions in Bengaluru, 2019  
S.No  Sub -Sectors  GHG emissions in metric tonnes 
CO 2e 
1. Solid waste disposed into landfill  9,67,363  
2. Biological treatment of solid waste  1,35,458  
3. Incineration and open burning  297 
4. Domestic wastewater treatment and discharge  9,18,108  
Source: WRI India analysis for BBMP jurisdiction based on GHG -GPC framework   
 
 
 
  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   358  
B.3 Methodology for estimating carbon sinks using I -Tree Canopy Tool  
 
The general steps for calculating the GHG fluxes associated with trees outside forests is 
prescribed in Global Protocol for Community -Scale Greenhouse Gas Inventories, GPC 
supplemental Guidance for Forests and Trees, WRI 2022  (GPC GHG 2014)  . The document 
consists of case studies from different countries like Brazil, Mexico, Indonesia, India 
(Mumbai). It involves the calculation of activity data (Gross tree canopy denseness lost over 
the period and Area of tree canopy cover maintained and/ o r gained in the horizon year from 
for the base year of an inventory period), development of emission and carbon removal factors 
and the calculation of GHG fluxes. Preparation and assigning of activity data is done using I-
Tree Canopy  (i-Tree tool) , a web application.  
 
1 Background:  I-Tree Canopy is a web tool that allows users to simply photo -interpret 
Google aerial photographs to provide statistically valid estimates of tree, as well as calculate 
the uncertainty of their estimations (Standard Error, SE). I-Tree Canopy can be used wherever 
in the world where high -resolution, cloud -free Google pictures are available.  
Methodology:  Random points are placed in the defined area of interest and the user 
identifies the land cover class at the point centre. The application will provide estimation 
results during the interpretation process, and the user is free to define any cover classes they 
like. The results and point data can be exported for use in other applications.  
Caveats:  Analysis only focuses on tree canopy cover as a reference to biomass and does not 
take into consideration the entire biome - terrestrial ecosystems including soils, tree species, 
biodiversity etc. The user's capacity to accurately assign each point to its  appropriate class 
determines the analysis's reliability. In order to be appropriate for analysis, the classes must 
be interpretable from an aerial photograph. The precision of the estimate will improve as the 
number of points increases, while the estimate's standard error will drop. The standard error 
will be too high if there are not enough categorised points in order to have any actual certainty 
about the estimate.  Another drawback of this method is that due to relatively low image 
resolution (e.g., image pixel size), environmental conditions, or poor image quality, the Google 
imagery may be challenging to understand in all locations.  
 
The emission factor derived from Forest Survey of India’s Carbon Stock reports (MoEFCC)  of 
urban trees in Bengaluru  is 9.96 MgC/ha. IPCC default settlement chapter of 2019 refinement, 
Table 8.1  states that urban trees remove carbon at a rate of 2.8 MgC/ha/ year. Standing tree 
canopy cover (maintained) over the inventory period and the newly planted tree canopy cover  
(gained) over the inventory period have the ability to remove atmospheric carbon. Both 
standing tree canopy cover and newly planted tree canopy cover are therefore evaluated 
collectively for the purpose of calculating total carbon removed from atmosphere. However, 
the removal/loss of tree canopy cover also contributes to carbon emissions.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   359  
C. Extended Scenario and Sector -wise Barrier Analysis  
 
GHG emission reductions relative to the base year:  
Year  Existing and  Planned  Ambitious Scenario  Extended Scenario  
2030  - 22 %  16 %  34 %  
2040  - 44 %  26 %  58 %  
2050  - 58 %  56 %  91 %  
 
Extended Scenario Pathways Result:  
 
 
Barrier Analysis  
Barrier description table:  Complete a barrier description table for each extended strategy. 
Identify for each strategy, the types of barriers that could potentially affect the strategy 
implementation and provide further detail for each type.  
Strategy #1  Achieve 100% Decarbonisation of the Electricity Grid by 2050. A 
three -fold rise in nuclear -installed capacity by 2032) (UNFCCC 
2022b)  
Status Under Ambitious 
Scenario  Under the Ambitious Scenario, the proportion of the city’s grid electricity is 
derived from non -fossil fuels:  
By 2030: 68 %  
By 2040: 78.87 %  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   360  
By 2050: 89.76 %  
Strategy description/  
Assumptions  For an extended scenario, an increase in the share of non -fossil fuel in the 
city’s grid electricity is considered to be:  
By 2030: 73.03 %  
By 2040: 88.87 %  
By 2050: 100 %  
Barrier  Description of Barrier  
Legal and Institutional  • Land acquisition has been a challenge for the state over the past 
decade despite this being pointed out as one of the main barriers to 
Renewable Energy growth in Karnataka  (Sudhakar, Pooja Vijay 
Ramamurthi, and Radhika Sharma 2014) . 
• Government revenue lands are exhausted.  
• Presently, agricultural land cannot be bought by private players 
without conversion to non -agricultural land.  
Financial and economic  • Increased procurement of renewable power in the power purchase 
mix of BESCOM (a distributing company) in recent years, has led to 
the backing down of long -term thermal stations, wherein BESCOM 
would continue to pay the fixed/agreed charges in long -term 
contracts, which in turn could lead to increase in power purchase 
cost per unit  (ICRA 2022) . Most distribution utilities are making 
major losses as a consequence of expensive long -term power 
purchase agreements  (Regy et al. 2021) . 
• Financing a just transition will require supporting social and 
physical infrastructure, ecological restoration of affected areas, 
building capabilities of communities, and seeding new livelihood -
generating activities. The challenge is compounded by the hig h 
capital requirements of other sectors and the relatively high cost of 
capital in India.  
Political and social  • India’s target date for net zero is 2070 and Karnataka State does not 
have any plan for full decarbon isation of the grid before 2070.  
• City / BBMP has no control over the state and national grid. 
Renewable energy targets are set by state and national government 
departments and procurement notices are given by the Government 
of Karnataka to BESCOM.  
Practical and 
technological  • Potential grid congestion between power production sites and load 
centres .  
• Decentral ised grid -connected renewable power stations are difficult 
as current national and global experience shows the key importance 
of the large -scale deployment of RE installations in areas where 
conditions are favourable . 
• .In the absence of domestic production, higher dependence on 
renewable energy can lead to higher import dependence which 
consequently can threaten energy security.  
Other (please specify)  NA 
Actions proposed in CAP 
to mitigate barriers  • Ensure implementation of utility -scale energy storage for load or 
supply, to enhance the power generation flexibility of rooftop solar 
systems and other renewable energy (RE) sources.  
• Ensure by 2035, 50% of BESCOM's grid electricity is sourced by a 
decentral ised renewable resource network while enhancing the 
service delivery potential.  
• Conduct IEC campaigns to sensit ise financiers such as banks to 
provide low -cost loans for the uptake of green technologies and 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   361  
business models. (For example, renewable energy projects have 
been included under Priority Sector Lending (PSL), including off -
grid renewable energy solutions for households, solar power 
generators, windmills, micro -hydel plants, and non -conventional 
energ y-based public utilities (RBI, 2021)  
 
Strategy #2  Achieve 50% improvement in industrial energy efficiency  
Status Under Ambitious 
Scenario  Under the Ambitious Scenario the % improvement in industrial energy 
efficiency:  
By 2030: 15 %  
By 2040: 20 %  
By 2050: 25 %  
 
Strategy description/  
Assumptions  For an extended scenario, an increase in % improvement in industrial 
energy efficiency is considered:  
By 2030: 25 %  
By 2040: 40 %  
By 2050: 50 %  
Barrier  Description of Barrier  
Legal and Institutional  • Difficult affair to implement regulatory and reporting 
frameworks and implement compliance -based targets for 
MSMEs that is unorgan ised in nature.  
Financial and economic  • Despite many schemes and programme s to financially support 
MSMEs to transition to greener alternatives, most are, firstly, 
unaware of these opportunities, and secondly, do not consider 
the change a priority. Challenging due to smaller scales of 
production.  
• The provisions that have been made to make finance available 
for the MSMEs to improve energy efficiency and promote the 
use of renewable energy do not take the complexities of being 
part of a larger supply chain.  
• CAPEX requirement for energy efficiency projects (especially for 
MSMEs). High capital requirement - electricity -based 
technologies invariably require a higher initial investment in 
comparison to fossil fuel -based technologies.  
Political and Social  • Although institutions have been created to operate 
independently, political intrusion often makes them weak. 
There are challenges that emerge due to the federal political 
structure of the country and the positioning of energy as a 
concurrent item in the In dian constitution (ADBI 2020) . 
Practical and 
technological  • Availability of commercially viable technologies for MSMEs is a 
critical issue.  
• MSMEs have limited handholding in terms of active technical 
assistance in order to adopt new technologies.  
Other (please specify)  • Many industries are so fragmented that incentives to build end -
to-end circular and efficient value chains are ineffective.  
• MSMEs are an unorgan ised and informal nature sector. There 
are several MSMEs that are not registered and functional.  
Actions proposed in CAP 
to mitigate barriers  • Enforcing mandatory shift to electric motor -driven systems for 
both PAT and Non -PAT industries.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   362  
• Skill development of the workforce on new energy efficiency, 
sustainable mobility, and green hydrogen technologies will be 
needed. Stakeholders' knowledge of climate finance structures, 
policies, and the various instruments across MSME clusters is 
limited.   
• Build the knowledge capacity of the shop floor technicians 
pertaining to energy efficiency practices in the MSME units.  
• Developing and installing waste heat recovery and co -
generation units specifically developed for MSMEs.  
• Mandatory audits on MSME heavy machinery and assess motor 
body temperature, vibration, rpm, etc., on monthly basis.  
• Subsid ising high -cost imported technology for the direct 
consumers who opt and implement the Energy Efficiency 
technologies.  
• Establishing ‘energy management cells’ at the MSME cluster 
levels and promoting the development of an Ecosystem for 
“Zero Defect Manufacturing ” in MSMEs.  
 
Strategy #3  Achieve a 90% transition to electric cooking in both 
residential and commercial buildings by 2050  
Status Under Ambitious 
Scenario  Under the Ambitious Scenario the % transition to electric cooking:  
Year  Residential  Commercial  Informal  
2030  26%  42%  20%  
2040  32%  47%  22%  
2050  38%  52%  26%  
 
Strategy description/  
Assumptions  For an extended scenario, an increase in % transition to electric 
cooking:  
Year  Residential  Commercial  Informal  
2030  50%  62%  28%  
2040  75%  81%  36%  
2050  90%  90%  50%  
 
Barrier  Description of Barrier  
Legal and Institutional   
Financial and economic  • One major challenge is the ability to pay for the increase in 
electricity costs for low -income groups.  
• eCooking is more cost -effective than LPG only for households 
getting cheap electricity (CEEW 2021) . 
Political and Social  • Cultural resistance to induction cooking, there’s a belief that 
even if you use the same cooking condiments modern 
appliances change the taste of food.  
• There are groups of people who want to retain the traditional 
cooking methods along with the traditional cooking stoves.  
Practical and 
technological  • Absence of responsive after -sales services.  
• Aggregation of mass adoption of induction cooking / electric 
cooktops increase the electricity demand and poses a risk to 
the grid transmission structure.  
Other (please specify)   
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   363  
Actions proposed in CAP 
to mitigate barriers  • Incentiv ise with higher subsidies for faster adoption of 
eCooking  
• Develop policies concentrating on reducing the upfront cost 
of eCooking devices  
• Ensure reliable electricity supply at affordable tariffs to drive 
the eCooking transition  
• Promote health benefits and a healthy cooking lifestyle of 
eCooking  
• Promote the uptake of electric cooking by demonstrating 
electric cooktops don’t alter the flavours  of the cooking  
 
Strategy #4  Accelerate vehicular fuel shift to increase cleaner fuel (Electric and  
Hydrogen) adoption to 100% by 2050  
Status Under 
Ambitious 
Scenario  Under the Ambitious Scenario, by 2050, the following are the projected shift to 
cleaner fuels (Electric and Hydrogen)  
 
Mode  2030  2040  2050  
EV H2 EV H2 EV H2 
Car 10%  0% 58%  2% 85%  5% 
Freight (MDT)  6% 2% 22%  5% 37%  10%  
Motorcycle  30%  0% 60%  0% 90%  0% 
Taxi  10%  0% 58%  2% 80%  5% 
Autorickshaw  20%  0% 50%  0% 85%  0% 
Bus 10%  2% 35%  5% 65%  10%  
 
Strategy 
description/  
Assumptions  Accelerate vehicular fuel shift actions to accelerate adoption of cleaner fuels 
(Electric and H2) in the city and achieve 100% shift away from fossil fuels by 
2050  
Mode  2030  2040  2050  
EV H2 EV H2 EV H2 
Car 15% 1% 65%  5% 90%  10%  
Freight (MDT)  10%  5% 40%  15% 50%  50%  
Motorcycle  35%  0% 70%  0% 100%  0% 
Taxi  15% 1% 65%  5% 90%  10%  
Autorickshaw  25%  0% 60%  0% 100%  0% 
Bus 20%  5% 50%  15% 60%  40%  
 
Existing Policy at 
state level  • Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of Hybrid and Electric Vehicles 
(FAME 2) scheme by MHI  (GoI)  
• Subsidy provided by Government of Karnataka for purchase of EV to 
public bus operators  
• Grand challenge for deployment of E -buses by Convergence Energy 
Services Limited (CESL), a PSU under Ministry of Power  
• Karnataka Electric Vehicle and Energy Storage Policy 2017  
• Green Hydrogen Policy, 2022 under the National Hydrogen Mission  
Other plans/initiatives for fuel switch (city level):  
• BMTC’s plans to switch to E -buses based on above 
schemes/subsidies/financial assistance   
• Freight Smart Cities - City Logistics Plans (CLP) that DULT will be 
preparing  
• Pilot project by DULT and BBMP to check the feasibility of using 
electric vehicles for Solid Waste Management.  
Barrier  Description of Barrier  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   364  
Legal and 
Institutional  • Karnataka Government bought out the EV Policy in 2017, but it has not 
been implemented effectively. Robust implementation mechanisms 
need to be developed (Desai 2022) . 
• Getting access to electricity is another challenge in EV penetration. 
Either new transformers are needed to cater to this demand, or a 
separate (dedicated) electrical connection is needed for EV charging 
infrastructure. Both processes are very expensive an d cumbersome in 
Karnataka for third parties (charging infrastructure investors) hence 
government intervention here in the form of subsidies/connections etc. 
is required (Desai 2022) . 
• A conducive ecosystem for retrofitting of vehicles is yet to be developed 
in the state.  
• Freight vehicles are mostly private operated. Hence it will be difficult to 
shift to electric vehicles compared to public transport modes ( e.g. 
BMTC buses).  
• Since Hydrogen is an emerging fuel, policy supports would be needed 
to achieve cost reductions that make it competitive with other 
fuels (Kelly and Zhou 2022)  
Financial and 
economic  • Higher purchase price of EVs - Indian customers are very price sensitive 
and higher upfront costs make EVs unattractive to many (TERI 2020) . 
EVs will need to come down in price over time, whether by market 
trend or subsidy or a combination of both.  
• In Karnataka, only road tax exemption with no registration fee is given 
to EV customers, unlike other states where consumers get additional 
financial subsidies on purchasing EV  (Kanuri, Rao, and Mulukutla WRI 
India) . The state is currently focussing more on providing incentives to 
EV makers and investors.  
• Lock -in of fossil fuel vehicles purchased in recent years. To get the 
maximum cost -benefit, the owners will use these recently purchased 
vehicles for a longer period. [For the case of buses, to reduce the share 
of fossil fuel buses (due to lock -in), a ‘Tra nsition fuel’ could be 
introduced.]  
• Access to finance for purchasing/procuring cleaner fuels should be 
made easy  
• Unknown re -sale value of EVs -Due to lesser awareness on EV 
performance on longer life, acceptance of EV as re -sale option is 
relatively uncertain (Tarei, Chand, and Gupta 2021) . 
Political and 
social  • Range anxiety - The perceived notion that EVs have a limitation in 
terms of the distance it can cover in a single charge. Having adequate 
charging infrastructure and advances in vehicle technology might 
improve this.  
• Consumer perception of high battery replacement cost and lack of 
skilled manpower in the EV sector (lack of skilled local 
mechanics) (TERI 2020)  is a deterrent in EV adoption  
• Inferior quality of EVs in the market and safety concerns associated 
with these could be another deterrent in terms of impacting consumers 
sentiments (B. B. Bureau 2022) . 
Practical and 
technological  • Shortage of charging infrastructure - Availability and accessibility of 
charging infrastructure. Few barriers here are ease of availability of 
land/space for EV chargers, building/public spaces doesn’t have any 
regulations/mandate on EV chargers, barriers faced by the private 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   365  
players in EV charging ecosystems, etc. The city has to address these to 
ensure availability of charging infrastructure.  
• Low availability on maintenance, service, and repair  (Tarei, Chand, and 
Gupta 2021)  
• Agencies like BMTC are procuring E -buses through GCC model. Since 
these are new procurement model in the city’s context, its challenges 
are yet to be recogn ised/real ised which could be a potential barrier in 
scaling it up.  
• India needs to depend on other countries for the procurement of raw 
materials for production such as Lithium and Cobalt.  
• Limited availability of raw materials required for EV batteries creates 
significant dependence on external sources for sourcing these. Despite 
there being production incentives in place, this will be major constraint 
in EV production.  
• Technical challenges in hydrogen productions - Commercial scale of 
production on green hydrogen is yet to be developed. The cost of green 
hydrogen production is much higher than what is produced from fossil 
fuels (Aayog 2022) . 
• Transporting and storing hydrogen remain a big challenge and will 
require massive investment in infrastructure upgrades. Storage and 
transport  of hydrogen have traditionally been difficult due to the 
unique characteristics of the gas —flammability, low density, ease of 
dispersion, and embrittlement (IEA 2020)   
• Standards around hydrogen use either do not  exist or have not  been 
updated  (Aayog 2022)  
Actions proposed 
in CAP to mitigate 
barriers  • Offer incentives for EVs such as reduced parking fee and toll charges, 
waiver on fitness certificates  
• Provide accessible EV Charging infrastructure:  
o Develop common charging infrastructure standards across 
vehicle types, OEMs  
o Develop city -specific guidelines for setting up EV charging 
infrastructure in buildings and public places  
o Pilot EV chargers integrated with urban infrastructure such as 
streetlights  
o Identify spaces (such as petrol pumps) for charging larger 
vehicles ( e.g. buses, freight, etc.)  
o Encourage and incentivise private participation in EV charging 
infrastructure development for enhancing ease of doing 
business  
• Facilitate private players to conduct R&D on battery recycling, 
retrofitting of fossil fuel vehicles to cleaner fuels, etc. by providing seed 
funds/subsidies, promoting ease of doing business, strengthening 
start -up ecosystems . 
• Conduct a study to understand the feasibility of using Hydrogen as a 
fuel in public transport (buses)  
• Prepare a Clean Fuel Transition Plan for Bengaluru with 2040 as the 
horizon year. This plan should be prepared for all modes with specific 
focus on Buses and IPT modes (Autorickshaws, etc.).  
• Make access to finance easier through strategies  such as:  
▪ Providing low -income drivers and small businesses 
with easy loans to reduce upfront costs of EV  
▪ Better communication of MUDRA loans  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   366  
• Conduct IEC campaigns to sensit ise stakeholders on  cleaner fuel 
vehicles (its benefits, infrastructure requirements, usage, fuel 
efficiency, battery recycle, etc.) (Stakeholders groups - PT operators, 
potential EV buyers, charging infra developers, actor involved in 
vehicle servicing and maintenance  etc.)  
• Conduct training programme s targeted  for marginalised groups to 
facilitate just transition (to avoid externalities of cleaner fuel 
penetration)  
 
Strategy #5  
Solid waste  Accelerate 100% energy recovery from scientific landfill to achieve 
net zero waste  
Status Under 
Ambitious 
Scenario  In the ambitious scenario, the city could achieve maximum results in terms of 
100% waste segregation, processing and recycling. The primary focus was to 
achieve organic waste recovery coupled with the expansion of recycling of 
inorganic waste. The wet waste processing in 2019 was just 59%, which had 
increased to about 91% with greater waste diversion. The city implements  a 
scientific landfill and reaches about 75% of energy recovery.  
 
Ambitious scenario achievements:  
• Over 90% of waste processing and recycling – implementation of IEC 
to nudge behavioural change, ward level SWM micro plan, increased 
decentralised waste management, awareness on material recovery 
etc. 
• About 75% of gas capture from scientific landfill – implementation of 
scientific landfill in the city with gas capture facility.  
 
Some other parallel benefits due to the above ambitious scenario actions are:  
• 100% segregation of waste and maximum diversion of waste  
• Legacy waste bioremediation  
• Domestic sanitary waste incineration  
• Removal of garbage -vulnerable hotspots  
• Increased informal recycling  
• Decreased dependency on waste -to-energy plants  
• Improved life cycle assessment and extended producer responsibility 
performance.  
Strategy 
description/  
Assumptions  Globally, for the world to have any chance at reversing the climate crisis, 
methane emissions must be slashed by 33 percent by 2030, the latest report 
from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 1 warns. 
Methane is an 80 times more potent greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide, and 
its reduction is critical to preventing climate catastrophe.  Large historic 
methane emission reductions reported to the United Nations Framework on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC) by Annex -I countries  are related to 
landfills.  However, landfill waste is expected to grow at more than double the 
rate of population growth between now and 2050, mainly driven by countries 
in the tropics. As a result, global municipal solid waste methane emissions 
could nearly double by 2050. Converse ly, these emissions could be reduced 
using technically feasible reduction strategies including active landfill covers, 
energy recovery, and omitting organic waste from landfills.  
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   367  
To achieve 100% energy recovery and ensure decreased global warming 
potential along with environmental and socio -economic benefits, the city 
requires to accelerate 100% gas capture from scientific landfills.  
• By 2030:  25% |50%  
• By 2040:  50% l 75%  
• By 2050:  75% l 100%  
 
Additional actions that could be taken in parallel are:  
• C&D debris recovery and e -waste management.  
Barrier  Description of Barrier  
Legal and 
Institutional  Scientific landfill management:  
• In 2012, BBMP came up with a draft solid waste management policy 
for Bengaluru city highlighting the need for scientific landfill 
management and suggested having scientific landfills in the city such 
as Mavalipura, Mandur etc. It is been over 10 years, and  the 
Mavalipura and Mandur landfills remained unscientific and were 
closed. The current function landfill is also unmanaged.  
• The new draft BBMP SWM Bye-laws , 2020 focuses on the 
bioremediation of closed landfills and there is a lesser emphasis on 
scientific landfills and energy recovery.  
• In 2014, KSPCB released guidelines for no development zone/buffer 
zone around MSW landfill sites in Karnataka and EC clearances for 
the site. The city is yet to explore a way to streamline landfill 
management.  
• The city needs to build a structure to ensure the implementation of 
provisions from the MSW rule, 2016 in terms of site selection, 
inspection facilities, monitoring mechanisms, safety provisions, 
operation and maintenance, criteria for pollution prevention  and 
water quality monitoring for scientific landfill.  
• Another major barrier is the communication gap between the centre, 
state and the city.  
 
 
C&D debris recovery and e -waste management:  
• Recovery of Construction and Demolition debris: Yet to have a 
structure in the implementation of C&D Waste Management Rules , 
2016 at the city level. The city is working on the application of 
materials made from construction and demolition waste and its 
products to meet the parameters and compliance criteria. The city is 
pursuing increased source separation and reuse of constru ction and 
demolition building materials at construction sites. Source separation 
can be challenging for general contractors due to sc heduling and 
space availability, and may have a cost impact.  
• E-waste management: Even after improved EPR performance, there 
is still a lack of formal ising informal recyclers, a lack of awareness 
amongst the consumers and financial incentives.  
Financial and 
economic  Scientific landfill management:  
• Challenges in allotment of funds in the annual budget for the 
construction of landfills is leading to unmanaged landfills in the city. 
For the past 10 years, the city has been planning to bioremediate the 
closed landfills which still need PPP support and are still under 
process.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   368  
Political and social  • Swachh Bharat Mission aims to provide sanitation facilities to 
scientific municipal solid waste management and liquid waste 
management to every citizen. SBM stipulates building the capacities 
of urban local bodies strong to design, execute and operate all 
systems related to service provision. This requires close linkage 
between planning, operationalising and sensit ising of the sanitation 
and waste management services within the departments as well as the 
citizens for achieving the overall goal of SBM, this yet needs political 
strength. It is noted that large funds under IEC have not been availed 
due to a lack of aware ness.  
• Lack of citizen engagement, public awareness and responsible 
consumer behaviour: To achieve 100% energy recovery, it is essential 
that communities understand the importance of scientific landfills, 
and have political support in ensuring stringent implement ation of 
compliance criteria.  
Practical and 
technological  • Technical know -how and  
• Availability of land.  
Other (please 
specify)  NA 
Actions proposed 
in CAP to mitigate 
barriers  Achieve 100% energy recovery from scientific landfill  
 
• Ensure land allotment and financial mechanism  
• Increase technical manpower  
• By ensuring active participation and formal ising informal recyclers 
through providing improved working conditions so that they do not 
have to sort materials in the landfill itself.  
• Encourage PPP models  
• Streamlining of operations and a focus on best practices in waste 
management solutions. For instance, Brazil  has established a strong 
public policy using clean development mechanism projects to 
reduce  methane emissions  from  landfills. An important component of 
these projects is the sale of avoided emissions by the private market 
to generate revenue. Also, similar to EPA established the landfill 
methane outreach programme . This programme  was developed to 
reduce methane emissions from landfills in a cost -effective manner by 
encouraging the development of environmentally and economically 
beneficial landfill gas -to-energy projects  
• Regularise the market for landfill gas end users.  Encourage landfill 
operators to capture methane by favouring landfill gas as a fuel 
source, offering incentives for landfill gas util isation projects, and 
providing tax advantages for technologies that use biogas from 
landfills or anaerobic digestion.   
 
Strategy # 5  
Wastewater 
treatment  Increase anaerobic treatment with biogas capture  
Status Under 
Ambitious 
Scenario  In the Ambitious scenario, the city could achieve 95% of open discharge 
removal and implementation of anaerobic treatment with biogas capture to 
38.55% along with Activated sludge process (ASP) with nitrification and 
anaerobic digesters at 23.4% by 2050.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   369  
Strategy 
description/  
Assumptions  Along with GHG emission reduction, water quality also plays a prominent role 
when it comes to wastewater treatment. Considering both as equally 
important we understand that -  
 
a) Anaerobic treatment with biogas capture contributes towards lesser 
energy requirement, nutrient demand and biological sludge. This also 
provides the market with a potential energy source and reduces GHG 
emissions. Because the energetics of anaerobic processes result in 
lower biomass production b y a factor of about 6 to 8 
times (Community 2020) , sludge processing and disposal costs are 
reduced greatly when compared with the aerobic alternative.   
b) ASP with nitrification and anaerobic digesters ensures the removal of 
biological nutrients and phosphorus to meet discharge standards.  
 
So, when it comes to domestic/municipal wastewater, where the 
concentration of biodegradable COD and temperature are lower, and there is 
a need for higher effluent quality and nutrient removal, a combination of both 
the above -mentioned technologies is requ ired (unlike Industrial wastewater). 
Hence,  
 
Anaerobic treatment 
with biogas capture  
2030: 23.27% | 54.69%  
2040: 25.09% | 57.73%  
2050: 38.555 | 65.47%  ASP with nitrification 
and anaerobic digestion  
2030: 20.24%| 35.31%  
2040: 21.82% | 37.27%  
2050: 23.64% | 34.53%  Open discharge  
 
2030: 28.40% | 10%  
2040: 22.80% | 5%  
2050: 5% | 0%  
 
Barrier  Description of Barrier  
Legal and 
Institutional  • City’s primary focus is to achieve basic water and sanitation services 
to the citizens and the complete resources are towards the 
improvement of adaptive capacity and resilience of the city and 
less/ignored focus on mitigation potential from wastewater treatment 
(as the mitigation potential is comparatively less to other sectors)  
• Also, the city is working towards treating wastewater to ensure water 
quality. As the construction, operation and maintenance of  STPs are a 
costly affair, there is a need for a financial structure where the 
expense, power, staff/manpower etc. are analysed to ensure the 
complete functioning of STPs. In this scenario, technological 
innovation takes a back seat.  
• Water act, 1974 , the first legislative measure taken to directly address 
the issue of water pollution and conservation in the country. The 
construction of STPs has been an objective under several of the 
government’s programmes such as Swachh Bharat Abhiyan and Atal 
Mission  for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT). All 
these provisions address wastewater discharge as a matter of 
pollution alone but not as a resource recovery facility.  
• Lack of policy mandate at the central level for wastewater treatment 
and regulatory framework leads to triviality towards the same.  
• Karnataka State Water Policy , 2019 promotes innovation in 
technologies and planning for alternative approaches to wastewater 
treatment that are neighbourhood scale, encourage biological 
solutions that are financially less expensive and have lower energy 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   370  
consumption, separate grey and black water, linked to markets for 
sludge, and passive technologies where possible. Less expensive 
anaerobic treatment is a major challenge for the city.  
• BWSSB vision document mentions reimagining wastewater treatment 
plants as water resource recovery facilities but there is no focus to 
elevate the need for anaerobic treatment with biogas capture.  
Financial and 
economic  • According to BWSSB, it is difficult to convert and propose 100% 
wastewater treatment technology as anaerobic treatment with a 
biogas capture system in Bengaluru. Currently, the capital cost of 
water and sanitation services is primarily focused towards 100%  
water and sanitation services and reduction of NRW, allotment of 
extra funds towards this treatment is seen to be difficult as this 
technology requires higher capital and operational costs.  
Political and social  • Challenges in creating awareness: The city is yet to realise the 
prominence of emission reduction as most of the legal provisions still 
emphas ise effluent standards/pollution levels rather than balancing 
the concerns on both mitigation and adaptation actions.  
• Challenges in having sufficient skilled labour: To operate the STPs it 
is important to have skilled labour and the contractors who install the 
STPs lack technical expertise and end up hiring unskilled labours.  
• Acquisition of land and directing the sewage flow to STPs is a major 
challenge as the city’s drainage and infrastructure are old that need 
upgradation. Despite these issues,   
Practical and 
technological  • Anaerobic treatment with gas capture requires more manpower and 
space which is currently not feasible in Bengaluru.  
• Anaerobic treatment has a longer start -up time (months) for the 
anaerobic digestion process compared to aerobic (days), this puts a 
lot of pressure in terms of space, time, money and manpower to 
favour aerobic.  
• As most of the STPs are decentral ised with around 10 -30MLD, it is 
difficult in terms of manpower, area and operations to provide gas 
capture at the STPs leading to maximum STPs upgradation only till 
nitrification.  
Other (please 
specify)  NA 
Actions proposed 
in CAP to mitigate 
barriers  GHG in wastewater systems can be attributed to sewage sludge treatment and 
disposal processes, hence anaerobic treatment of wastewater is the primary 
action towards mitigation.  
• Focus on wastewater policy with not just effluent standards but with 
provisions towards energy efficiency and resource recovery 
technologies.  
• Upgrade wastewater treatment: minimise pollution of receiving 
wastewater through effective primary, secondary and tertiary 
treatment of raw sewage. Change household cleaners to ones that do 
not damage septic tanks and are easily biodegradable to reduce 
nutrients getting into systems rather than needing complex and 
expensive treatment.  
• Improve data availability and model complexity on GHG emissions 
from biological processes in wastewater treatment plants, 
information that will be increasingly important.  
• Energy recovery during wastewater treatment leading to net -positive 
energy generation from wastewater.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   371  
• Fully recover nutrients such as phosphorus and nitrogen from 
wastewater and reduce dependency on fossil -based chemical 
fertilisers. The agricultural util isation of sludge can be promoted in 
the regions where the sludge contains an acceptable level of 
pollutants ( e.g. heavy metals, persistent organic pollutants)  
 
 
  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   372  
D. Details on chang e in Blue -Green Network in Bengaluru  
 
The information in this annexure is based on a WRI India paper - Urban Blue -Green 
Conundrum: A 10 -City Study on the Impacts of Urban isation on Natural Infrastructure in 
India (Goswami et al. 2022) . 
• Vegetation loss is primarily seen in the outer developing and new growth areas (10 -20 
km band from the city centre ), while there has been some vegetation gain in 
central/inner city areas and in the 20 -50 km range.  
 
Figure 81 Built -Up Area and Vegetation Loss Overlap Significantly in Bengaluru and Vegetation 
Gains Are Distinctly  Visible along  Two Rivers Flowing Out of the City to the South  Figure 82 Maps Showing Groundwater Recharge Potential in Bengaluru Indicating 
Substantial New Development  Sited on High and Very High Recharge Potential Zones  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   373  
 
   
Source: (Goswami et al. 2022)  
 
  Bengaluru: Land Use / Land Cover Changes and Estimated Groundwater Loss  
Note: The 0 -20 km region roughly corresponds to the urban area in municipal and metropolitan 
limits.  
1. Between 2000 -2015, built -up area increased by 76% in the 0 –50 km region, 
with a higher rate in peri -urban areas  
0-20 km: Built -up area increased from 316 sq. km.  to 520 sq. km.  (165% increase)  
20-50 km: Built -up area increased from 86 sq. km.  to 188 sq. km.  (219% increase)  
 
2. Between 1997 -2017, blue cover decreased by 74% in the 0 –50 km region, with 
a higher rate in peri -urban areas  
0-20 km: Blue cover decreased from 21 sq. km. to 10 sq. km.  (52% decrease)  
20-50 km: Blue cover decreased from 133 sq. km. to 30 sq. km.  (78% decrease)  
 
3. Between 1997 -2017, total green cover decreased in urban areas and increased 
in peri -urban areas  
0-20 km: Green cover loss was 351 sq . km. and gain is 218 sq . km. – net loss of 133 sq. km.  
20-50 km: Green cover loss was 599 sq . km. and gain is 1465 sq . km. – net gain of 866 sq. km.   
Note:  Gains in green cover may indicate a shift in land use or land cover e.g., from barren to 
cultivated land, woodlots or rooftop and individual gardens. Improved water supply or groundwater 
availability, leakages from older underground water supply and sewer age networks and increasing 
unsewered discharge of urban wastewater can also contribute to increase in green cover.  
4. Between 2000 -2015, 64% of new development was sited on high and very high 
recharge potential zones  
0-20 km: Close to 200 sq. km.  of new development on medium to very high recharge potential 
zones; estimated groundwater lost is 62 mld  
20-50 km: Close to 100 sq. km.  of new development on medium to very high recharge potential 
zones; estimated groundwater lost is 30 mld  
Note:  The estimated groundwater lost in the 0 -50 km region (92 mld), could have potentially met 
17% of the water demand of the urban population added during this period.  
 
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   374  
E. Sector -wise Evaluation Indicators  
 
The detailed format for evaluation is given for the Energy and Building sector. For the other 
sectors the evaluating indicators are listed in the subsequent tables . 
 
Sector: Energy and  Building  
# Evaluating 
Indicators  Target  Baseline 
value 
(Year)  Evaluation 
frequency  Value year  Change 
Observed  Assessment 
(Satisfactory/ 
slow but positive 
change/ negative)  Y1 Y2    Y3 Y4 
1 % New 
appliances 
with 5 -star 
label  40% by 
2030, 
61% by 
2040, 
83% by 
2050  2024  2 years        
2  Transition to 
clean fuel 
technologies 
in 
manufacturing 
industries  100% by 
2040  2024  2 years        
3 % Increase in 
energy 
efficiency in 
manufacturing 
industries  15% by 
2030, 
20% by 
2040, 
25% by 
2050  2024  2 years        
4 % Penetration 
of insulated 
walls and 
roofs in new 
residential 
building 
stocks  33% by 
2030, 
52% by 
2040, 
71% by 
2050  2024  2 years        
5 % Penetration 
of insulated 
walls and 
roofs in new 
commercial or 
institutional 
building 
stocks  38% by 
2030, 
56% by 
2040, 
75% by 
2050   2019  2 years        
6 % Of non -
fossil fuel 
source 
generation in 
the city’s grid 
electricity   68% by 
2030, 
77% by 
2040, 
89% by 
2050  2019  1 year        
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   375  
Sector: Energy and  Building  
# Evaluating 
Indicators  Target  Baseline 
value 
(Year)  Evaluation 
frequency  Value year  Change 
Observed  Assessment 
(Satisfactory/ 
slow but positive 
change/ negative)  Y1 Y2    Y3 Y4 
7 % Transition 
to clean 
cooking 
technologies 
from solid fuel 
cooking stoves  100% by 
2030  2024  1 year        
8 Household 
average hot 
water demand 
met by the 
electricity -
solar water 
heater  68% by 
2030, 
73% by 
2040, 
96% by 
2050  2024  1 year        
9 Affordable 
electricity 
access to low -
income people  100% by 
2025  2024  Half -
yearly        
10 % Penetration 
of efficient 
appliances 
and fixtures in 
low-income 
houses  41% by 
2030, 
63% by 
2040, 
86% by 
2050  2019  1 year        
11 Availability of 
climate -
resilient 
affordable 
housing   2024  2 years        
 
(Only the indicators are listed for the succeeding sectors)  
 
Sector: Air Quality  
# Evaluating Indicators  Target  Baseline 
value (Year)  Evaluation 
frequency  
1 % Annual Reduction in physical air 
pollutants (PM2.5 and PM10) 
concentration  46% by 2026 
(NCAP targets ) 2024  Half -yearly  
2 % Annual average reduction in gaseous 
criteria pollutants (NOx, SO2, CO and O3) 
concentration   2024  Half -yearly  
3 % Commercial and institutional buildings 
complying WHO Indoor air quality 
standards and guidelines  30% by 2030  
 
70% by 2050  2024  2 years  
4 Roadmap for a comprehensive health 
action plan tacking risks due to air 
pollution  By 2030  2024  1 year  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   376  
Sector: Air Quality  
# Evaluating Indicators  Target  Baseline 
value (Year)  Evaluation 
frequency  
5 New CAAQMS and transition the existing 
manual station to CAAQMS systems  13 new CAAQMS 
and transition of 
the manual 
system to 
CAAQMS by 2035  2025  2 years  
6 # Of Low emission zone (LEZ), ultra -low 
emission zone (ULEZ), or zero emission 
areas  By 2030  2024  1 year  
7 Creation of regional Airshed Management 
Cell By 2030  2024  2 years  
8 Potential change in premature mortality 
(Deaths avoided per year)  790 in 2030,  
 
5,495 in 2050  2025  2 years  
9 Emissions of criteria pollutants in key 
areas of the city (e.g. near hospitals, 
schools, care homes, or low -income 
neighbourhoods)   2024  1 year  
 
Sector: Solid Waste  
# Evaluating Indicators  Target  Baseline 
value (Year)  Evaluation 
frequency  
1 % of waste segregation at the source  100% by 2025  2019  1 year  
2 % of waste transported using a low -
emission fleet  100% by 2030  2024  1 year  
3 Total no. of daily trips for waste collection 
and transport  2025  2024  1 year  
4 Total secured jobs created, increased 
wages, and social security schemes availed 
by pourakarmikas   2025  2024  2 years  
5 %/total amount of wet waste composted 
(central ised and decentral ised, diverted 
from landfill)  70.31% by 2030, 
85.29% by 2040,  
91.55% by 2050  2019  2 years  
6 %/total amount of  dry waste recycled 
(diverted from landfill)  61.11% by 2030, 
71.8% by 2040, 
93.1% by 2050  2019  2 years  
7 %/total amount of wet waste limited to 
landfill  29.69% by 2030, 
14.71% by 2040, 
8.45% by 2050  2024  2 years  
8 %/total amount of dry waste limited to 
landfill  38.89% by 2030, 
28.13% by 2040, 
6.90% by 2050  2024  2 years  
9 Total amount of dry waste recycled by 
women from vulnerable communities  2030  2025  2 years  
10 % of gas capture at the landfill  25% by 2030, 
50% by 2040 and 
75% by 2050  2025  2 years  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   377  
Sector: Solid Waste  
# Evaluating Indicators  Target  Baseline 
value (Year)  Evaluation 
frequency  
11 % of tree plantation at the closed landfills  2030  2025  2 years  
12 % of C&D waste removed, recycled and 
recovered  2030  2025  2 years  
 
Sector: Water, Wastewater And Stormwater  
# Evaluating Indicators  Target  Baseline 
value (Year)  Evaluation 
frequency  
1 % reduction in water loss  15% by 2030  2019  2 years  
2 Total groundwater recharge/storage at the 
community level  2030  2024  1 years  
3 % of water stored as rainwater (RWH)  2030  2024  1 year  
4 % change in the rejuvenation of existing 
groundwater wells with the involvement 
of local communities (Need to check this)  2030  2024  1 years  
5 Total no. of freshwater lakes rejuvenated 
(Need to check this)  2030  2019  1 years  
6 Total water being recycled across the city  2030  2019  2 years  
7 % of recycled water reuse  15% by 2030, 
30% by 2040  2019  2 years  
8 % of ASP with BNR wastewater treatment  48% by 2030, 
51% by 2040, 
56.5% by 2027  2019  2 years  
9 % of open discharge of wastewater  29% by 2030, 
22% by 2040, 5% 
by 20 50 2019  2 years  
10 % of anaerobic wastewater treatment with 
biogas capture  23%  by 2030, 
27% by 2035, 
38.5% by 2035  2019  2 years  
11 Total no. of occasions of flooding in a year 
(water logging/flooding incidence)  2030  2024  1 year  
 
 
Sector: Transport  
# Evaluating Indicators  Target  Baseline 
value (Year)  Evaluation 
frequency  
1 % of new households in the city  (added 
from 2019) that should be in its TOD 
areas  (Approx.)   
 
 20% (by 2030)  
70% (by 2040)  
90% (by 2050)  X% in 2024  Every 3 
years  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   378  
Sector: Transport  
# Evaluating Indicators  Target  Baseline 
value (Year)  Evaluation 
frequency  
2 Mode share of Public Transport  
(Bus+ Metro+ Suburban Rail) amongst all 
modes (inclusive of NMT modes)  62% (by 2030)  
66% (by 2040)  
70% (by 2050)  43% in 2019  
(Based on 
WRI Analysis 
for GHG 
inventory of 
2019)  Every 2 
years  
3 Mode share of NMT (walking +Cycling) 
amongst all modes  13% (by 2030)  
14% (by 2040)  
15% (by 2050)  11% in 2019 
(Based on 
WRI Analysis 
for GHG 
inventory of 
2019)  Every 2 
years  
4 % of total buses running on cleaner fuels 
(Electric, Hydrogen)  12% (by 2030)  
40% (by 2040)  
75% (by 2050)  <1% in 2019 
(Based on 
vehicle 
registration 
data from 
Parivahan 
portal ) Every 2 
years  
5 % of total private vehicles (cars 
+motorcycles) running on cleaner fuels 
(Electric, Hydrogen)  10% for cars (by 
2030) and 30% 
for 2W (by 2030);  
60% for both (by 
2040)  
90% for both (by 
2050)  <1% in 2019 
(Based on 
vehicle 
registration 
data from 
Parivahan 
portal ) Every 2 
years  
6 % of total freight vehicles running on 
cleaner fuels (Electric, Hydrogen)  8% (by 2030)  
27% (by 2040)  
47% (by 2050)  <1% in 2019 
(Based on 
vehicle 
registration 
data from 
Parivahan 
portal ) Every 2 
years  
7 No. of potholes in the city roads  0 (by 2035)  Y nos. in 
2024  Annually  
8 No. of annual road accidents and fatalities  0 (by 2035)  Y nos. in 
2024  Annually  
9 Multiple climate resilient -road network 
connectivity to all locations in the city  100% (by 2035)  Z% in 2024  Every 3 
years  
10 No. of transport services stopped/paused 
due to different climate and 
environmental hazards  0 (by 2035)  Y nos. in 
2024  Annually  
11 Total annual cost of repair/maintenance 
of transport infrastructure and assets due 
to different climate and environmental 
hazards  Rs. 0 Lakh  (by 
2035)  Rs. X Lakh  in 
2024  Annually  
12 % of city’s population having access to 
public transport (bus, metro, suburban 100% by 2035  Z% in 2024  Every 3 
years  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   379  
Sector: Transport  
# Evaluating Indicators  Target  Baseline 
value (Year)  Evaluation 
frequency  
rail) stops/stations within 5 minute 
walking distance from their residence  
13 Service coverage of public transport in the 
city 100% by 2035  Z% in 2024  Every 3 
years  
14 Transport sector’s contribution to the 
city’s Air pollution  <5%(minimum) 
by 2050  Z% (of 
PM2.5, 
PM10, 
Sox,NOx, 
etc.) in 2024  Every 3 
years  
15 No. of new jobs created in the domain of 
cleaner fuel vehicles (to facilitate shift 
from fossil fuel run vehicles)  X nos. by 2050   Every 3 
years  
16 Per capita Average  monthly expenditure 
on transport  Rs. Z by 2035  Rs. N by 
2024  Annually  
17 Public transport ridership figures -
disaggregated by gender, age, ability, 
income category     
18 Average  travel speed of all modes    Every 3 
years  
 
 
Sector: Urban Planning, Greening, Biodiversity  
# Evaluating Indicators  Target  Baseline 
value (Year)  Evaluation 
frequency  
1 Prepare and adopt the RMP 2041, and 
set up the Master Plan Coordination 
Committee  By 2025  2024  Half -yearly  
2 % of new households in the city  (added 
from 2019) that should be in its TOD 
areas  (Referring to Transport sector’s 
evaluating indicator No.1)  Around 20 % (by 
2030)  
70% (by 2040)  
90% (by 2050)  X% in 2024  Every 3 
years  
3 All spatial plans and DCRs to adopt a 
climate -resilience lens and mandatorily 
follow consultative planning processes  Mandatorily 
followed for all 
plans and DCRs  (Yes/No/Par
tially 
followed) in 
2024  Annually  
4 No. of urban infrastructure 
schemes/projects adhering to disaster 
resilient standards  Mandatorily 
adhering to it for 
all projects  X nos. in 
2024  Annually  
5 Increase in the city’s tree cover (tree 
canopy) from the baseline  From baseline - 
10% by 2030;  
20% by 2040  In 2024  Every 3 
years  
6 Share (%) of city’s total vegetation cover 
and permeable surface area to the total 
city area  40% of the city’s 
surface area by 
2040  Y% in 2024  Every 3 
years  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   380  
Sector: Urban Planning, Greening, Biodiversity  
# Evaluating Indicators  Target  Baseline 
value (Year)  Evaluation 
frequency  
7 Operationalise the Biodiversity 
Management Committee (BMC)  By 2023  (Yes/No) in 
2023  Every 3 
years  
8 % of footpath s converted to permeable 
surface material  75% by 2050    
9 Total area recovered and restored, which 
are demarcated as environmentally -
sensitive, no -development buffer areas 
in the RMP 2041  By 2035    
10 Provide safe and affordable housing for 
100% urban poor and vulnerable groups 
in locations having access to public 
transport stops/stations within a 5 -
minute walk  100% by 2050    
11 Per capita open space in the city (to 
ensure equitable distribution of open 
spaces)  6 sqm. by 20 50 
 
 2.2 
sqm (Corresp
ondent 2017)  
in 2017  Every 3 
years  
12 % increase in affordable housing DUs of 
particular size (say under 60 sqm) in 
TOD areas     
13 Increase in budget allocation for NBS 
activities     
 
 
Sector: Disaster Management  
# Evaluating Indicators  Target  Baseline value 
(Year)  Evaluation 
frequency  
1 Regularly updated Data Repository 
system for the city  Presence of a 
detailed city level 
data repository 
including climate 
data, hazard data 
and other 
demography 
related datasets 
along with a 
mechanism for 
regular update.  Assessment and 
Compilation of 
datasets (for the 
year 2024) as 
mentioned in the 
action track 1.1  Once in two 
years  
2 Revisit CCRAVA CCRA -VA 
document with relevant 
modifications at regular intervals  Comprehensive 
CCRAVA CCRA -
VA document 
once on every two 
years  Current 
CCRAVA CCRA -
VA document  Once in two 
years  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   381  
Sector: Disaster Management  
# Evaluating Indicators  Target  Baseline value 
(Year)  Evaluation 
frequency  
3 Robust policy level document on 
Disaster Management at the city 
level  Frame a 
comprehensive 
Disaster 
Management 
Plan   Disaster 
Management Plan 
for Bengaluru in 
2024  Once in two 
years  
4 Inputs from ward unit on gaps in 
existing regulatory powers and 
budget availability for the ward.  An empowered 
Ward level 
disaster 
management unit 
with adequate 
regulatory 
powers and 
financial budget.  Ward wise - 
Regulatory 
powers and 
budget for year 
2025  Annual  
5 Capacity building training 
workshops: twice a year for ward  
level representatives and once a year 
across other stakeholder groups  Regular Capacity 
building 
workshops across 
different 
stakeholder 
groups to 
increase 
resilience  List of 
trainings/capacity 
building 
workshops 
conducted with 
number of 
attendees, 
duration of 
training and 
training material 
conducted in 
2024  Twice a year 
minimum 
with regular 
updated 
training 
content  
6 Loss of life due to such disasters by 
2030  Zero loss of life 
due to climate 
and 
environmental 
disasters 
identified in 
CCRAVA CCRA -
VA by 2030  Baseline needs to 
be done in 2024  Yearly  
7 Injuries and other health -related 
concerns due to climatic and 
environmental hazards  Reduction in 50 
percent of 
injuries and other 
health related 
concerns  by 2030 
due to climate  
and 
environmental 
disasters 
identified in 
CCRAVA CCRA -
VA Baseline needs to 
be done in 2024  Yearly  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   382  
Sector: Disaster Management  
# Evaluating Indicators  Target  Baseline value 
(Year)  Evaluation 
frequency  
8 Economic loss due to the occurrence 
of climatic and environmental 
disasters to be less than 70 per cent 
by 2030  Reduction of 70 
percent of 
economic loss by 
2030 due to 
climate and  
environmental 
disasters 
identified in 
CCRAVA CCRA -
VA Baseline needs to 
be done in 2024  Yearly  
9 Loss of assets or property to be less 
than 70 per cent by 2030.  Reduction of 70 
percent on loss of 
property and 
assets by 2030 
due to climate 
and 
environmental 
disasters 
identified in 
CCRAVA CCRA -
VA Baseline needs to 
be done in 2024  Yearly  
10 Urban flooding : Area under flooding  Reduction in area 
under flooding by 
80 percent by 
2030  Baseline needs to 
be done in 2024  Yearly  
11 Urban flooding : Population affected 
by flooding  Reduction in 
population 
affected by 
flooding by 80 
percent  Baseline needs to 
be done in 2024  Yearly  
12 Urban Heat: Area under LST greater 
than 35℃ in summer months  Reduction in area 
under LST 
greater than 35 
deg C in summer 
months by 50 
percent by 2030  Baseline needs to 
be done in 2024  Yearly  
13 Urban Heat: Area under LST greater 
than 30℃  in winter months  Reduction in area 
under LST 
greater than 30 ℃ 
in winter months 
by 70 percent by 
2030  Baseline needs to 
be done in 2024  Yearly  
 
  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   383  
F. Brief on population projections  
 
Growth of Bengaluru and past population trends  
As per the 2011 census,  Bangalore, officially known as Bengaluru  had a population of 
8,443,675 (84.43 lakh). The  Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike  (BBMP,  Greater Bangalore 
Municipal Corporation) is in charge of the civic administration of the city. The municipal 
corporation area is about 713 sq. km . The population density of the BBM P area is 12,000 
persons per sq. km. BBMP falls within the local planning area of the Bengaluru Development 
Authority (BDA).  Bengaluru has different jurisdictional boundaries s hown in the Figure 83 
below : 
 
Figure 83: Planning Jurisdictions  
 
Source: BBMP restr ucturing  committee  
 
Bengaluru Metropolitan Region (BMR):  BMR extend over 8005 sq. km and is 
constituted by three districts namely Bangalore Urban, Bangalore Rural and Ramanagaram 
(Ramanagaram is a newly created district carved out from Bangalore Rural district that 
includes Ramanagaram, Channapatna, Magadi and Kanakapura taluks). The local Planning 
Area of BDA falls within BMR.  
 
Bengaluru Metropolitan Area (BMA):  BMA is spread over an area of about 1294 sq. km 
which comprises of local planning area of BDA and part of the local planning area of 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   384  
Bengaluru Mysore Infrastructure Corridor Area Planning Authority (BMICAPA). BMA 
includes BBMP and 251 villages and approximately had a population of 90 lakh in 2011.  
 
Bangalore Urban district  (BUD)  came into being in 1986, with the partition of the 
erstwhile  Bangalore district  into Bangalore  Urban and  Bangalore Rural districts . Bangalore 
Urban has five taluks:  Hebbal  (Bangalore North),  Kengeri  (Bangalore 
South),  Krishnarajapura  (Bangalore East),  Yelahanka  (Bangalore North Additional) 
and Anekal . 
 
Table 39: Planning jurisdictions and population densities  
Jurisdiction  Area 
(sq.km)  Population 
(2011)  Population 
density (person 
per sq. km)  
Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike 
(BBMP)  713  84,43,675  11842  
Bengaluru Metropolitan Area (BMA)  1294  85,20,435   6519  
Bengaluru Urban District (BUD)  2196  96,21,551  4381  
Bengaluru Metropolitan Region (BMR)  8005  1,16,58,906  1456  
 
Figure 84: Growth of population in Bengaluru  
Source: (Census 2011) , RSP 2031 -BMRDA and BBMP; WRI India Analysis , BBMP Restructuring Committee 
Report, 2017 , (BBMP and India 2015)  
 
Table 40: Population and growth rate of the BBMP area for the past three decades  
Year  Area 
(sq.km)  Population 
(Millions)  Population density  
(Person per sq. km)  Growth Rate 
(%) 
1991  225 4.32  19200  39.33  
2001  225 5.89  26178  36.28  
2011  713 8.44  11842  43.41  
Source: Census  
 
The population growth rate during the period of amalgamation (2001 -2011) is about 43.41%.  
Specifically, due to a couple of reasons:  
a. The erstwhile Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BMP) expanded over 225 sq. km. and 
was amalgamated with 7 City Municipal Councils, 1 Town Municipal Council and 110 
villages to form BBMP in 2007 with an area of 713  sq. km.  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   385  
b. The IT boom in Bengaluru city and the population rise has seen more migrants moving 
into the city from different parts of the country. The city witnessed an increase in 
population due to urban isation and employment opportunities.  
Due to increased area, the population density has seen a dip with a much larger spread of 
population base moving across the city.  
 
Population densities of other metropolitan cities and Bengaluru  
 
Table 41:Understanding area and population density in the past decade in other metropolitan cities  
City (Municipal 
corporations)  Area 
(sq.km)  2011 
Population 
density 
(person per sq. 
km)  Source  
Municipal 
corporation of Delhi  1,397 7,880  B-PAC report  
Mumbai - BMC  437.71  28,426  MCAP Report and Pathways data collection 
sheet  
Kolkata City  185 24,306  (Census 2011)  
Chennai  426 15,676  (TNPCB 2021)  
Bangalore (BBMP)  713 11,842  (Census 2011)  
Hyderabad  650 11,806 (Census 2011)  
 
Figure 85:Different municipal corporations and population densities , 2011  
 
 
Due to larger public transport infrastructure and vast employment opportunities, cities such 
as Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai accommodate higher population density within the 
municipal corporation area , making them extremely  compact cities , whereas cities such as 
Bengaluru and Hyderabad, the so -called IT hubs that have the migrant population moving in 
from other  cities , are widespread over  a larger area, specifically at the periphery where the IT 
industries are located.  Figure.3 provides an understanding of the population density of the city 
in 2011:  
 
 
 050001000015000200002500030000
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%
Population 2011 Area (sq.kms) Population density (person per sq.km)
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   386  
Figure 86: Bengaluru ’s estimated population density  distribution    
 
Source: WRI India analysis using buildings data from KSRSAC; Landuse from BBMP, and population density 
estimates from Census 2011.  
 
BMA’s core area with 8  ULBs had additional 110 villages included in the peripheral areas as 
BBMP administrative boundary which in the above figures depicts that the core city has a 
higher density with a gradual spread of population moving towards the peripheral areas due 
to the IT industry set up in the periphery. Hence, a rational  approach towards understanding 
the growth rate of the core and 110 villages in the periphery would provide a reasonable 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   387  
understanding of both the population growth of the city with regard to  the density and may 
also provide an assumption on how the growth would be based on the need for infrastructural 
development of the city.  
 
Existing population projections for Bengaluru city  
Several studies on population projection were carried out for Bengaluru by various 
organ isations in connection with infrastructure development for the city.  
Table 42: Assumptions/conditions applied by different sources  
SOURCE  ASSUMPTIONS/CONSIDERATIONS  Source  
Bengaluru 
Developmen
t Authority 
(BDA)  “Master Plan 2015” was prepared by Bangalore Development 
Authority between 2003 and 2005 and the final plan was 
completed in 2007. The base year used for population 
projections is 2001. The annual growth rate for the BMP area 
(100 wards) is assumed to be 0 .78%.  https://openjicar
eport.jica.go.jp/p
df/12300356_01.
pdf 
 
Bengaluru 
Water and 
Sewerage 
Supply 
Board 
(BWSSB)  An increase in growth rate is worked out at 4% per annum for 2012 
to 2031, 3% per annum for 2032 -2041 and 2% per annum from 
2042 to 2051.  BWSSB  
Revised 
Master Plan 
(RMP) for 
Bengaluru 
2031  - Water availability based on population carrying capacity  
- Proportional distribution of population between the 
state and the region, conforming to the past trends  
- Share of the population between the core (BMA) and the 
rest of BMR.  
- Redistribution of projected population in core and 
peripheral areas as 80:20  
- Projections were only till 2031 with annual growth rates 
for 2021 and 2031 at 2.2, 7.38.  RMP 2031  
Bengaluru 
Water 
Supply and 
Sewerage 
Project 
(Phase -3), 
JICA report, 
2017  - Referred to 10 different data sources for population 
projections such as - BDA, BMRDA, BWSSB, Ch2M, etc.  
- Also referred to the past decadal population trends of 
different cities  
- Looked into the population increase from 1941 to 2011  
- An increasing growth rate is assumed due to the focus on 
8 ULBs and 110 villages' infrastructural development.  
- Assuming a ceiling density to be 300persons/ha, Core 
and ULB see a lesser growth rate compared to 110 villages.  
- With the above -saturated growth rate consideration, the 
assumption of standard annual growth rate for the core is 
assumed at 0.78% (As per BDA, Master plan) and is 
applied till 2051.  
- For 8  ULBs and 110 villages different annual growth rates 
were assumed in consultation with BDA, BBMP and 
BWSSB)  
High growth rates were author ised by BDA, BWSSB, 
BBMP and DHV.  https://openjicar
eport.jica.go.jp/p
df/12300356_01.
pdf 
 
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   388  
Table 43: Population growth for the next three decades from different sources:  
Source  Jurisdict
ional 
boundar
ies Populat
ion 
2021 
(million
s) 2021 
CAG
R Populati
on 2031 
(millions
) 2031 
CAG
R Populati
on 2041 
(million
s) 2041 
CAG
R Populati
on 2051 
(million
s) 2051 
CAG
R 
BWSSB  BUD  14.2  3.05%  21.1  2.2%  28.3  1.80
% 34.5  1.87%  
RMP  BMA  9.96  2.2%  20.3  7.38
% -  -  
Revised 
Structur
e Plan 
(RSP)  BBMP  11.24  2.83%  14.1  2.51
% -  -  
JICA 
report 
(High 
growth
) BBMP  10.66  2.36
% 13.2  
 2.21
% 16.38  2.13
% 20.2  2.12%  
JICA 
report 
(Mediu
m 
growth)  BBMP  10.65  2.29%  12.7 1.77%  15.1 1.81%  18.1 1.82%  
JICA 
report 
(Low 
growth)  BBMP  10.65  2.29%  12.3  1.47
% 14.28  1.48
% 16.5 1.49%  
Source: (JICA 2017)  
 
Based on the development pattern, JICA population projection was done for the BBMP area 
in three portions: Core area, 8  ULBs and 110 villages. The growth rate mentioned in the above 
table is the average of all the 3 portions together.  
 
Challenges of projecting population for BBMP  
1. In 2007, with the formation of the BBMP area with an additional 100 wards into the 
administrative boundary making the area increase from 225  sq. km. to 713 sq. km ., a 
historic reference point is absent after BBMP was created.  
- The historical growth before 2007 may not imply a linear growth trend due to 
the drastic population growth hike at the time of Census 2011 due to the IT 
boom, this creates a gap in understanding the historical growth trend and its 
implication in future projections.  
2. The recent census in hand is 2011 and there is a decade gap in understanding the 
population growth of a city over the years.  
3. Bengaluru, with its multiple planning jurisdiction boundaries and various 
studies/department's population projections, cater to different boundaries creating a 
lack of reference points to deal with.  
- Also, there are multiple population projections derived at different years with 
different horizon estimates, making it difficult to interpret the growth 
trajectory.  
 
Reasons for considering the JICA  report high growth projections  
BBMP area has experienced rapid population growth in the past decades, however, in the JICA 
report the tendencies of population densities in the areas are character ised as follows:  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   389  
1. Core area:  Population is saturated with a ceiling density. The growth rate shall be fixed 
through the future with a lower rate under the saturated conditions at present. The 
annual growth rate is assumed at 0.78 by BDA “Master Plan 2015” for the decade 2011 -
2021. Th e rate is assumed to be applied until the year 2051 in this report as well.  
2. 110 Villages : Population is continuously growing with different growth rates by sub -
area.  The population for the next three decades were author ised through a tripartite 
meeting by BDA, BBMP and BWSSB. The overall average annual growth rate for future 
decades are: 4.38% for 2011 -2021, 3.75% for 2021 -2031, 3.25% for 2031 -2041 and 
3.0% for 2041 -2051.  
3. ULBs : There are three references on the projection of annual growth rate for ULBs as 
shown below.  
a. Low growth rate : 4.38% growth rate in 2021 and later from 2031 w.r.t the DPR for 
110 Villages Water Supply and Sewerage Project, 1.3% is assumed to continue until 
2051.  
b. Medium growth rate : 4.38% growth rate at 2021 and later from 2031 w.r.t the 
NMT report on the improvement of water supply, 2.36% growth rate is assumed to 
continue until 2051.  
c. High growth rate : The annual growth rates from 2021 are 4.38%, 2031 is 3.75%, 
2041 is 3.25% and 2051 is 3%  
 
The formula adopted in the JICA report is:  A = A0 (1+ r) n , where A = population after n 
years, A0 = population in the base year, r = growth rate and n = years.  The population by area 
are projected using annual growth rates assumed in the above item 1) to item 3) by area. The 
range of the population (maximum to minimum figures) is caused by the application of 
different population growth rates for ULBs.  
 
For the CAP, currently, we have considered the high -growth scenario population 
projections of the JICA report.  
  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   390  
G. Minutes of meeting   
 
Stakeholder department briefing on sector wise draft goals, targets and actions 
under Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan (BCAP)  
08.03.23 from 4:00 PM to 5:30 PM IST  
at Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike Head Office  
 
Background: As a C40 City, Bengaluru is committed to developing its Bengaluru Climate 
Action and Resilience Plan that details the targets and actions of how the city will achieve its 
fair-share reduction of emissions in line with the most ambitious goals of the Paris Agreement. 
The Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan will also include actions that will help 
Bengaluru increase resilience to climate risks and reduce carbon emissions. In this regard, 
BBMP has been working with WRI India as a knowledge partner and  C40 Cities as a technical 
partner in the preparation of the Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan.  
The Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan preparation commenced in August 2021 
through an official kick -off meeting facilitated by Ms. Vandita Sharma , IAS, CS, GoK. 
Currently a GPC -compliant GHG inventory has been completed for 2019 , along with pathways 
modelling for various decarbonisation scenarios with an objective of achieving net zero  by 
2050. Also, a Climate Change Risk and Vulnerability Assessment has been completed for 
Bengaluru. Currently the project is in the stage of preparation of the final report along with 
finalisation of the targets and actions across sectors such as Stationar y energy and buildings, 
transport , solid waste, water, wastewater, stormwater management, air quality, urban 
planning, greening and biodiversity, and disaster management.  
Date: 08-03-2023   
 
Venue: Meeting hall -1, BBMP Head office, Bengaluru   
 
Time: 4-5:30 PM   
 
Meeting agenda:  
● Presentation on key findings and proposed sector -wise goals, targets, actions under 
Bengaluru Climate Action Plan  
● Discussion with nodal officers/ representatives from stakeholder departments on 
goals, targets and actions  
  
Members from BBMP:    
• Sri. Parashuram Shinnalkar, Joint commissioner, SWM, BBMP   
• Sri. Vishwanath, CE, BBMP   
• Sri. Nagesh  H, Nodal officer, SWM, BBMP   
  
Members from WRI India:   
• Ms. Jaya Dhindaw, Program Director - Integrated Urban Development, Planning and 
Resilience, Sustainable Cities & Transport Program, WRI India   
• Ms. Shrimoyee Bhattacharya, Program Lead, Urban Development, Sustainable Cities 
and Transport, WRI India   
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   391  
• Ms. Radha Chanchani, Manager, Sustainable Cities & Transport Program, WRI India   
• Ms. Nanduri Prashanti, Senior Program Research Associate - Sustainable Cities and 
Transport, WRI India   
• Ms. Praseeda Mukundan, Senior Program Research Associate, Urban Development, 
Sustainable Cities and Transport, WRI India    
• Mr. Chetan Venkataramana Naika, Senior Program Associate - Sustainable Cities and 
Transport, WRI India   
• Dr. Sruthi Subbanna, Senior Program Research Associate - Sustainable Cities and 
Transport, WRI India   
 
Members from C40:   
• Mr. Benjamin John, City Advisor for Bengaluru , C40 Cities   
  
List of Attendees of all other stakeholder departments : A copy of the attendance is 
attached  below.  
 
Meeting Proceedings:   
• Sri Parashuram Shinnalkar , Joint Commissioner (SWM), BBMP welcomed the 
attendees and started the meeting.  
• Ms. Shrimoyee Bhattacharya, Program Lead, Urban Development, WRI India and Mr 
Benjamin John, City Advisor, C40 gave a brief overview of Bengaluru’s engagement 
in the C40 cities network and the key components of the Climate Action Plan.  
• Ms Shrimoyee then presented the BCAP progress update, she covered the 
preparation process, stakeholder engagement undertaken during plan preparation 
process along with the key outputs (GHG inventory, CCRA, Pathways modelling, 
Targets and Action identificat ion) of the BCAP work.  
• Dr. Jaganmohan Sharma, Director General EMPRI stressed on the need for a climate 
action plan for Bengaluru and the need for leveraging initiatives announced at the 
national level such as the green credit programme . 
• The attendees were then divided into sector -wise break -out groups to have focussed 
discussions on sector -wise goals, targets and actions.  
• Key discussion points from each group discussion is summar ised below.    
 
a) Energy and  Building   
The representatives from KREDL, KPTCL, BESCOM, and Department of Industries and 
Commerce were present. Below are the key discussion points that were recorded during the 
sectoral group discussions.     
 
• KREDL representative suggested to provide more details on the specific roles that 
secondary agencies take up. To this WRI India, responded that the suggestion will be 
considered upon the internal discussion on how to include the general roles in the 
form of a fo otnote of the action track tables.    
• KREDL representative suggested to mandate the auditing rather than to assess energy 
efficiency in existing public buildings and conduct a feasibility study to understand the 
potential shift to maximise energy -efficient  buildings. To this WRI India, responded 
that changes will be made accordingly.    
• KREDL representative suggested to include an action or revise the existing 2.4 action 
to “Revise the BBMP building bye-laws  to mandate the implementation of ENS codes 
for all residential buildings in the city”. To this WRI India, responded that changes will 
be made accordingly.   
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   392  
• KREDL representative suggested to replace the 2.10 action with “Develop energy 
auditing guidelines for the electrical retrofitting of buildings to energy -efficient fixture, 
appliances, conduits etc.    
• KPTCL and BESCOM representatives jointly suggested to remove the action 3.2 as 
BESCOM’s or state’s RE grid is dominated by private players and the RE generation is 
mostly from Independent Power Producers (IPPs).    
• KPTCL representative asked the reason for grid electricity to be included in the action 
plan, when the generation of the power is happening outside the boundary which is 
beyond the jurisdiction of BBMP. To this WRI India, responded by firstly talking about  
the GPC protocol and the different scopes (1, 2, and 3) of emissions involved in the 
calculation of GHG emission inventory of a defined boundary and how Bengaluru is 
indirectly responsible for the GHG emissions as part of scope 2 emissions.    
 
b) Transport  
The representatives from the Transport department, DULT, Traffic police, Police, KRIDE, 
BMTC, KSRTC, and BMRCL were  present. Below are the key discussion points that were 
recorded during the sectoral group discussions.     
 
Below are the key discussion points that were recorded during this sector group discussion:   
• Ms. Praseeda from the WRI team initiated the transport sector break -out group 
discussion by listing the key goals and targets identified for the sector. She highlighted 
that these were arrived at based on detailed analysis, modelling exercise and multiple 
rounds of consultations with all the concerned departments throughout the CAP process. 
Hard copy of the key goals and the action recommendations were shared with the 
participants. She then requested the participants to share their comments of the 
goals/tar gets/action recommendations.  
• Mr. Gnanendrakumar from the Transport Department mentioned that multi -modal 
integration (MMI) related activities should be under the responsibility of the recently 
approved BMLTA. He added that providing infrastructure ( e.g. Bus stops) for last -mile 
connectivity through public transport/inter mediate -public transport services should be 
the responsibility of BBMP, supported by the public transport agencies.  
• Mr. Gnanendrakumar also suggested that public transport agencies should subsid ise their 
ticket fares and if possible, make public transport free of cost. This could increase the 
ridership and mode share of these modes. He emphasised that this loss born by the public 
transport operators should be compensated by other means. To this poi nt, Ms. Praseeda 
mentioned the ‘Designing a Green Credit Scheme’  has been and action proposed under 
CAP to promote the adoption of public transport and NMT. She added that, the scope of 
this scheme could be broadened to include the above -mentioned point on  arriving at a 
mechanism to compensate the public transport operators.  
• Mr. Manjunath from KRIDE pointed out that the organisation is planning to provide 
subsidies on ticket fares to women and children. Smart cards are also being planned.  
• Mr. Yashwanth from BMTC highlighted various initiatives that BMTC has taken up to 
electrify its fleet in the near future.   
• Mr. Gnanendrakumar also mentioned different initiatives taken up by the Transport 
Department on providing safer public transport services ( e.g. Planning for installation of 
Location tracking and panic buttons in buses), on improving fuel efficiency ( e.g. No tax 
and no permit requirement for EVs <25  Km/hr) and vehicle efficiency ( e.g. Implementing 
the Scrappage Policy, not allowing government  vehicles >15yrs to function).  
• He also suggested to the WRI India team to include points on Global Warming Potential  
in the PPT for the upcoming meeting.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   393  
• Mr. Mohamed from DULT listed out various projects/ initiatives taken up by DULT on 
NMT, pilot testing of electrification SWM vehicles, etc. He also mentioned the status of 
the recently approved BMLTA.  
• Mr. Satish from KSRTC mentioned various initiatives that the corporation was taking up 
to shift the cleaner fuels.  
• Ms. Shreya from KRIDE asked if there could be any provision to give incentives to 
agencies like KRIDE who are including green building guidelines in their construction 
and related activities. To this the WRI team member suggested that the scope of the 
‘Gre en Credit Scheme’ could be widened to include all such aspects. This however could 
be detailed out when the Scheme is being designed.  
• Ms. Snehalatha from BMRCL highlighted that pushing for public transport shouldn’t be 
the only strategy and the city should actively look out for ways to improve the first and 
last mile connectivity along with curbing private vehicles.  
• Ms. Shashikala from BTP, pointed out that the city lacks basic infrastructure for NMT 
such as safe footpaths, streetlights, cycle tracks, etc. She also mentioned that to reduce 
congestion, the goods vehicles are not allowed to enter the city during the pea k hours 
(7:30am -11am).  
• Mr. Pragadeesh from KRIDE mentioned the need for having a multimodal freight 
management system.  
• To the above point Mr. Mohamed added that DULT is in discussion with BMRCL to find 
out the possibilities of using the metro for fleet movement (esp. in the airport line)  
• While discussing about electric vehicles Mr. Yashwanth highlighted that disposing the EV 
cells will be a huge problem in the future and a viable solution for it is yet to be suggested. 
He also highlighted that the lack of adherence of freight vehicles (tru cks) to emission 
standards is a major issue.  
• Ms. Snehalatha emphasised that all the public transport agencies shouldn’t try to compete 
with each other instead complement and collaborate to have an efficient transport system 
in the city.  
• To the various comments and concerned raised by all the participants, Ms. Praseeda 
highlighted the corresponding actions/provisions recommended under the CAP.  
• Ms. Praseeda summarised the discussion by listing out the key goals and targets again. 
The participants in -principle agreed to those. She also requested all the participants to 
give further inputs/comments and suggestions on the Action recommendation and G oals 
(if any) via email.  
 
c) Air Quality  
The representatives from KSPCB and Department of Health & Family Welfare were present. 
Below are the key discussion points that were recorded during the sectoral group 
discussions.     
• Department of Health & Family Welfare suggested to have an action on data 
collection of influenza -like illness (ILI) and severe acute respiratory infections (SARI) 
cases and related admission data on daily basis from the hospital to monitor the 
respiratory  illness due to poor air quality.    
• Department of Health & Family Welfare suggested to deploy AQI display monitors in 
the hotspot areas.    
•  KSPCB suggested to remove the action on usage of low -cost sensors for air quality 
monitoring.   
 
d) Water and Wastewater    
The representatives from BWSSB were present. Below are the key discussion points that 
were recorded during the sectoral group discussions.     
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   394  
 
• BWSSB officials addressed the point on 35% of treated wastewater reuse for non -
potable purposes across the city. They suggested a slight modification across the city 
to the properties that have dual pipeline systems.   
• BWSSB officials commented for point 1.1 that currently BWSSB is providing 100% 
piped water supply to all the households within the core and 8ULB areas and 110 
villages, with the support of BBMP the borewell water is being pumped and supplied 
to the households.   
• For point 1.2, BWSSB officials stated that the department already has the actual water 
consumption data of the city, and this point could be modified to make the data 
available in open access platform.   
• For point 2.1, BWSSB officials stated that a pilot was conducted to an area of 135  sq. 
km. and to achieve this action across the city, the department would require additional 
funding from the government.   
• For point 2.5, BWSSB officials have stated that the tariff has been modified to a 
volumetric tariff structure and is submitted to the Government and awaiting approval.   
• BWSSB officials stated that currently, the department is yet to investigate the matters 
of water and energy -efficient appliances awareness.   
• To point 2.14, BWSSB officials suggested modification that the TG Halli Reservoir is 
ready to operate which could provide an additional 110MLD of water, but this is 
subjected to 1.2TMC allocation that they are awaiting.   
• BWSSB officials said that property -level RWH is being extensively implemented and 
promoted but there are no actions yet on community -level RWH.   
• BWSSB officials stated that all the existing STPs will be upgraded to biological 
treatment systems by 2027, hence, point 4.2 can be modified accordingly.   
• BWSSB officials stated that the department has no role in the construction of public 
toilets, stormwater management and groundwater, hence these actions were not 
discussed.   
 
e) Urban Planning, Greening and Biodiversity  
The representatives from Forest department, BDA, and KBB were present. Below are the 
key discussion points that were recorded during the sectoral group discussions.     
 
Below are the key discussion points that were recorded during this sector group discussion:  
Ms. Radha from the WRI team initiated the discussion by highlighting the key goals/targets 
suggested for the sector. Goal/target wise comments/inputs from all the participants are listed 
below.  
 
A major point is that for quantitative goals, knowing current baselines is crucial.   
• Prepare and adopt the RMP 2041 and set up the Master Plan Coordination Committee, 
by 2025  
o Representative from BDA informed that the tender for preparation of Revised Master 
Plan (RMP 2041) has been cancelled as the Terms of Reference and Scope of Work 
has changed. Provisions of the approved Bengaluru TOD Policy are to be included. 
Spatial mappi ng of existing development has been done through remote sensing and 
drone surveys, with help from KSRSAC. While timelines for preparation and 
approval of the RMP are not clear, the current RMP can be amended to incorporate 
notified TOD Zone Plans and Regul ations.  
• Around 90% of the new households in the city (from 2019) should be accommodated in 
TOD Zones by 2050  
o Representative from BDA felt this was possible, however its likely this goal was not 
well understood and may be worded differently.  
• All spatial plans and DCRs to adopt climate action as a lens by 2030  
o Representative from BDA felt this can be done. Even without the proposed 
amendment to KTCPA (mandating land suitability, carrying capacity and impact 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   395  
analysis), RMP preparation does consider most of these aspects. Climate action can 
be included/embedded within the strategies and proposals of key stakeholder and 
implementing agencies (like BBMP) and other sectoral agencies; which are typically 
incorporat ed into the RMP.  
• Conserve and restore all blue -green networks in the city. All urban infrastructure 
schemes/projects should adhere to disaster resilient standards.  
o Representatives from all agencies agreed with this goal, though some clarity is 
needed on disaster resilient standards. Rep resentatives  from the Forest Department  
(district level ) clarified that some lakes were under their jurisdiction, so they should 
be included accordingly in other sectors such as  Water , too.   
• Increase the city’s tree cover (canopy) from the baseline by 10% by 2030 and 20% by 
2040.  
o Representative from BBMP (Forest Department ) confirmed that the Tree Census 
exercise is ongoing. There was some discussion on what the baseline number of trees 
(about 14 lakh ) and tree cover (about 15%) in the city. Rep from Forest Department  
(District Level) suggested that the goal should be clear about whether one is looking 
at trees per capita or area under tree cover. He felt that if it the latter, then given the 
baseline the goal/targets seem achievable. He also pointed out that it may be  easier to 
increase tree cover in the urban district beyond BBMP, compared to within it (as it is 
already highly developed). Others in the group also agreed that this goal would 
require id entifying public and private spaces to plant more trees as well as along 
roads, and that the BBMP Engineering  (Roads/Lakes) Department  also had a 
significant role to play here. They should be included as a secondary responsible 
agency.   
• Increase the city’s vegetation cover and permeable surface to 40% of the city surface area 
by 2040 to tackle flood and heat related disaster risk reduction.  
o Again, there was some discussion on the baseline – some studies suggest this is about 
8% and others 30%. The group felt that this has to be clear. If it is the latter (30%) 
then the goal of 40% seems achievable – through NBS and regulations in the RMP 
mand ating the creation of more open and permeable spaces. The rep from BDA noted 
that the RMP already mandates 15% reservation for open spaces.    
• Convert 75% of the city’s footpaths to permeable surface material by 2050  
o Representatives in the group could not comment on this goal as it was a question 
primarily for the BBMP Engineering  Department .   
• Operationalise the (recently re -constituted) Biodiversity Management Committee (BMC) 
by 2023 and prepare the People's Biodiversity Register (PBR) by 2025.  
o Reps from the State Biodiversity Board agreed to this goal as this is a mandate by the 
Act and Rules. The year for preparation of the PBR needs more clarity. They 
expressed that the above goals (restoration of blue -green networks, increasing trees 
and open  spaces etc) would also support biodiversity. The need for recogn ising water 
bodies  as habitats and planting native species trees/vegetation was emphas ised.   
• Provide safe and affordable housing for 100% urban poor and vulnerable groups in 
locations having access to public transport stops/stations within 5 -minute walkable 
distance by 2050  
o Reps from BDA felt this was possible (being a longer -term goal) through appropriate 
provisions in the RMP and several government  affordable housing schemes/projects 
that have been announced or are underway.  
• Increase the city’s publicly accessible per capita open space from the existing 2.2  sq. m. 
to 6 sq. m. by 2050  
o The group felt this goal was possible if various strategies could be adopted - such as 
leveraging buffer spaces around water bodies , institutional open spaces and RMP 
regulations pertaining to creation of public open spaces. The challenge of mandated 
open spaces (within large private layouts/developments) not have public access 
(despite being public assets as per RMP regulations) was discussed. The rep from BDA 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   396  
clarified that the Draft RMP 2031 (now withdrawn) had tried to address this issue by 
mandating public access roads.  
 
f) Disaster Management   
The representatives from KSNDMC were present. Below are the key discussion points that 
were recorded during the sectoral group discussions.     
 
Some of the key comments that were recorded during the discussion included:   
• Few action points that addressed expanding the existing information dissemination 
system to an even more elaborate and inclusive system was discussed at greater 
length. KSNDMC official mentioned about the more recent initiatives by the 
organisation like th e Common Alerting Protocol (CAP) dashboard portal and CAP 
SACHET platform initiated by the National Disaster Management Authority. This 
provides a converged platform for dissemination of targeted alerts to people in 
vernacular languages.    
• In addition Integration of DEWS (Disaster Early warning system) of KSNDMC with 
CAP SACHET platform for effective dissemination of messages   
• Further, the Emergency Response Support System which is a single pan India 
emergency number is being extended for Natural Calamities   
• The Early Warning Dissemination System (EWDS) has also been initiated by 
KSNDMC.    
• KSNDMC is also providing technical expertise in preparing a city level Disaster 
Management Plan with BBMP   
• Overall KSNDMC was happy to support BBMP for the suggested actions to achieve 
the goals and targets for enhancing city’s resilience.    
 
Key Decisions and Next Steps:  
• Departments will apprise their respective HoDs on BCAP goals, targets, actions 
pertaining to their sectors and share further feedbacks and suggestions with WRI 
India    
• BBMP will convene another follow up meeting with heads of sector agencies/ senior 
officials on BCAP goals, targets, actions  
• WRI India will review, evaluate and incorporate suggestions received from 
stakeholder departments in the final draft of BCAP.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   397  
Attendance sheet  
  
  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   398  
  
  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   399  
  
  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   400  
  
  
  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   401  
Head of the stakeholder department briefing on sector -wise  draft goals, targets and 
actions under the Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan (BCAP)  
13.03.23 from 4:00 PM to 5:30 PM IST  
at Vikasa Soudha, Bengaluru  
 
Background: As a C40 City, Bengaluru is committed to developing its Bengaluru Climate Action and 
Resilience Plan that details the targets and actions of how the city will achieve its fair -share reduction 
of emissions in line with the most ambitious goals of the Paris Agreement. The Bengaluru Climate 
Action and Resilience Plan will also include actions that will help Bengaluru increase resilience to 
climate risks and reduce carbon emissions. In this regard, BBMP has been working with WRI India as 
a knowledge partner and  C40 Cities as a technical partner in the preparation of the Bengaluru Climate 
Action and Resilience Plan.  
The Bengaluru Climate Action and Resilience Plan preparation commenced in August 2021 through an 
official kick -off meeting facilitated by Ms.  Vandita Sharma , IAS, CS, GoK. Currently, a GPC -compliant 
GHG inventory has been completed for the year 2019 along with pathways modelling for various 
decarbonisation scenarios to achieve net zero  by 2050. Also, a Climate Change Risk and Vulnerability 
Assessment has been completed for Bengaluru. Currently, the project is in the stage of preparation of 
the final report along with the finalisation of the targets and actions across sectors such as Sta tionary 
energy and buildings, transport , solid waste, water, wastewater, stormwater management, air quality, 
urban planning, greening and biodiversity, and disaster management.  
Date: 13-03-2023   
 
Venue: Hall No -317, Vikasa Soudha, Bengaluru   
 
Time: 4-5:30 PM   
 
Meeting agenda:  
● Presentation on key findings and proposed sector -wise goals, targets, and actions under 
Bengaluru Climate Action Plan.  
● In-principle consensus on mitigation and adaptation goals and targets proposed under BCAP  
● Discussion on BCAP Monitoring, evaluation, reporting and governance arrangements  
  
Members from BBMP and UDD:    
• Sri Rakesh Singh, Additional Chief Secretary, Urban Development Department, Govt of 
Karnataka  
• Sri. Parashuram Shinnalkar, Joint commissioner, SWM, BBMP   
• Sri. Basavraj Kabade, Chief Engineer, SWD, BBMP   
• Sri. Nagesh. H, Nodal officer, SWM, BBMP   
  
Members from WRI India:   
• Ms. Shrimoyee Bhattacharya, Program Lead, Urban Development, Sustainable Cities and 
Transport, WRI India   
• Ms. Radha Chanchani, Manager, Sustainable Cities & Transport Program, WRI India   
• Ms. Priya Narayanan, Senior Program Manager, Urban Development, Sustainable Cities and 
Transport, WRI India   
• Ms. Nanduri Prashanti, Senior Program Research Associate - Sustainable Cities and 
Transport, WRI India   
• Ms. Praseeda Mukundan, Senior Program Research Associate, Urban Development, 
Sustainable Cities and Transport, WRI India    
• Mr. Chetan Venkataramana Naika, Senior Program Associate - Sustainable Cities and 
Transport, WRI India   
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   402  
• Dr. Sruthi Subbanna, Senior Program Research Associate - Sustainable Cities and Transport, 
WRI India   
 
Members from C40:   
• Mr. Benjamin John, City Advisor for Bangalore, C40 Cities   
  
List of Attendees of all other stakeholder departments : A copy of the attendance is attached 
below . 
  
Meeting Proceedings:   
• Sri Basavraj Kabade, Chief Engineer, SWD, BBMP welcomed the attendees and started the 
meeting.  
• Ms. Shrimoyee Bhattacharya, Program Lead, Urban Development, WRI India and Mr 
Benjamin John, City Advisor, C40 gave a brief overview of Bengaluru’s engagement in the 
C40 cities network and the key components of the Climate Action Plan.  
• Ms Shrimoyee then presented the BCAP progress update, she covered the preparation 
process, stakeholder engagement undertaken during the plan preparation process along with 
the key outputs (GHG inventory, CCRA, Pathways modelling, Targets and Action 
identif ication, Goals/Targets and broad actions of each sector, Governance and monitoring) 
of the BCAP work. She suggested the following points:  
Monitoring, evaluation and reporting  
o GHG inventory could be updated every 2 years  
o Annual assessment of loss and damage due to climate -related disasters  
o Climate change risks and vulnerability assessment can be conducted every 3 -5 years  
Governance  
o Bengaluru climate action cell can be formed and housed in BBMP (Coordinate with 
other dept., monitoring etc.) where the technical wing is at EMPRI (Update GHG 
inventory, Conduct CCRAVA CCRA -VA and anchor capacity building and training). 
This cell could also work as a project preparation facility to help raise funds, support 
departments and forge partnerships.  
• Sri. Rakesh Singh, ACS -UDD advised WRI India to follow up with all agencies to provide the 
actions/goals of each department through BCAP that can be taken up by the departments 
respectively. He informed WRI India to update the progress and provide a copy o f the BCAP 
actions/goals/targets over an email for his comments.  He instructed the officials present from 
the stakeholder departments to provide their feedback on the proposed goals, targets and 
actions within 7 days.  
• KREDL suggested being included in the actions about PAT schemes. Since KREDL is the 
state -designated agency for PAT they will work with the assigned agency like the Department 
of Industries and Commerce as long as the tasks with the respective agencies are  made clear.   
• Forest department suggested being included in the actions about lakes rejuvenation (as 5 
lakes within BBMP are under their jurisdiction). They also requested the WRI India team to 
visit their office to discuss action points that were towards urban planning , greening and 
biodiversity.  
• Sri. Basavraj Kabade from BBMP requested WRI India to reach out to him on Friday to 
discuss the actions on solid waste and stormwater management.  
 
Key decisions and next steps  
- Representatives of stakeholder departments in -principle agreed on the sector -wise goals and 
targets set under BCAP  
- Departments will provide their inputs on proposed actions within seven working days from 
13.03.23  
- WRI India will review, evaluate, and incorporate suggestions received from stakeholder 
departments in the final draft of BCAP.   
 
 
  
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   403  
Attendance sheet  
  
 
] 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   404  
 
 
 
 
 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   405  
H. Technical specifications and summary of Pathways -AQ rapid scoping tool  by C40 
cities  
Pathways -AQ builds on an earlier ‘Pathways’ tool which models greenhouse gas emissions 
over time and allows users to input climate actions to estimate how they would impact the 
city’s emissions by 2050. In addition to modelling emissions of CO2e, Pathways -AQ models 
emissions of fine air pollutants (PM2.5), along with four pollutants that combine in the 
atmosphere to produce PM2.5 – nitrous oxides (NOx), sulphur dioxide (SO2), ammonia 
(NH3) and volatile organic compounds (VOC).  
It then uses spatial analysis from an external simplified air quality model, the Intervention 
Model for Air Pollution ( InMAP -Global ), to convert emissions of PM2.5 and other precursor 
pollutants into an annual average PM2.5 concentration within the city’s boundary. Finally, 
Pathways -AQ uses data from the Global Burden of Disease study to estimate city -wide 
mortality from six air pollu tion-linked diseases, to assess how climate policies may impact 
public health (Climate Leadership Group 2022) . 
InMAP -Global : Intervention Model for Air Pollution is a reduced -complexity model 
originally developed for the United States, to simulate annual -average primary and 
secondary PM2.5 concentrations across a global -through -urban spatial domain: “Global 
InMAP”. Global InMA P uses a variable resolution grid, with horizontal grid cell widths 
ranging from 500 km in remote locations to 4km in urban locations. We evaluate Global 
InMAP performance against both measurements and a state -of-the-science chemical 
transport model, GEOS -Chem. Against measurements, InMAP predicts total PM2.5 
concentrations with a normal ised mean error of 62%, compared to 41% for GEOS -Chem. For 
the emission scenarios considered, Global InMAP reproduced GEOS -Chem pollutant 
concentrations with a normal ised mean bias of 59% –121%, which is sufficient for initial 
policy assessment and scoping. Global InMAP can be run on a desktop computer; 
simulations here took 2.6 –8.4 hours (Thakrar et al. InMAP) . 
GEOS -Chem : GEOS -Chem enables simulations of atmospheric composition on local to 
global scales. It can be used off -line as a 3 -D chemical transport model driven by assimilated 
meteorological observations from the Goddard Earth Observing System (GEOS) of the NASA 
Global Modeling Assimilation Office (GMAO). It can also be used on -line as a chemical 
module coupled to weather and climate models (“Overview” 2017) . 
Bengaluru CAP -AQ Summary:  
Bengaluru experiences the negative effects of air pollution, with ambient fine particulate 
matter (PM 2.5) level in the city 8 times the level recommended by the World Health 
Organization (i.e., 5 ug/m3). Many sources of air pollution are also sources of climate 
pollutants, so reducing these sources can have the dual benefits of improving air quality and 
mitigating climate change. By implementing its CAP, Bengaluru has the opportunity to 
improve air qual ity, while contributing to global climate change mitiga tion and ensuring the 
well-being of its citizens.  
Bengaluru’s CAP actions and scenarios were analysed  using Pathways -AQ, a rapid, accessible 
scoping tool created to understand the air quality and health implications of city climate 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   406  
policies. Pathways -AQ is a combined GHG and air quality scoping tool. It creates an air 
quality emissions inventory by applying air pollutant emission factors to “activity” (fuel use) 
data. In addition to modelling emissions of carbon dioxide equivalent (C O2e), it models 
direct emissions of PM2.5 along with four pollutants that combine in the atmosphere to 
produce PM2.5: nitrous oxides (NO x), sulphur dioxide (SO 2), ammonia (NH 3), and volatile 
organic compounds (VOC).  
To calculate emissions, Pathways -AQ uses a bottom -up approach to model activity within 
the city for the residential, commercial, industrial, transport and waste sectors, then 
multiplies each activity by an emission factor (emissions per unit of activity) to estimate the 
mass of p ollutants generated.74 Pathways -AQ then uses spatial analysis from an external 
tool, the InMAP ( Intervention Model for Air Pollution ) model  (Muller et al. 2017) , to convert 
emissions of PM2.5 and other precursor pollutants into an annual average PM 2.5 
concentration within the area of the city’s boundary. Finally, Pathways -AQ uses baseline 
population health data from the Global Burden of Disease 2019 Study, coupled with relative 
risk curves, to estimate city -wide mortality from six diseases that are lin ked to air pollution 
(PM2.5).  
Currently, the two largest contributors to annual average PM2.5 concentrations in Bengaluru 
are 1) on -road transport, including high -emitting cars and buses; 2) manufacturing and 
industrial emissions.  
Bengaluru can have a positive impact on its air quality by fully implementing its climate 
action planning scenarios, averting hundreds of premature deaths each year through climate 
actions that benefit air quality as well, though the improvement is not eno ugh to lower PM 2.5 
concentrations to meet the World Health Organization (WHO) ambient air quality guidance 
(i.e., 5 ug/m3). The estimated changes in air pollution and premature mortality presented in 
Table 1 provides an indication of the reductions in PM 2.5 concentrations and the associated 
premature deaths over the modelled time horizons, under the Existing and Planned (E&P), 
Ambitious and Extended scenarios, respectively.  Table 44 provides the estimates.  
Table 44: Estimated changes in air pollution and premature mortality associated with the 
implementation of Bengaluru’s Climate Action Plan scenarios  
 Change in air pollution  
(Annual average 
reduction in PM 2.5 
concentration)  Change in premature 
mortality (Deaths avoided 
per year)  
Existing and Planned Scenario  
 
74 Note, importantly, that only emission sources included in the GHG inventory are reflected in this analysis. 
Pathways -AQ generates mass emission estimates for GHGs as well as PM2.5 and precursor pollutants. This analysis 
does not include all emission source s within the city.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   407  
 Change in air pollution  
(Annual average 
reduction in PM 2.5 
concentration)  Change in premature 
mortality (Deaths avoided 
per year)  
2030  3.0 µg/m3 560 
2040  4.6 µg/m3 1,368 
2050  6.5 µg/m3 2,913 
Ambitious Scenario  
2030  4.1 µg/m3 790 
2040  7.2 µg/m3 2,230  
2050  11.4 µg/m3 5,495  
Extended Scenario    
2030  5.1 µg/m3 989 
2040  8.8 µg/m3 2,796 
2050  13.0 µg/m3 6,383  
Source: C40 cities analysis  
 
Under the E&P scenario, climate mitigation strategies in the manufacturing industrial sector 
— such as promoting energy efficiency — yield high potential to mitigate GHG emissions and 
reduce air pollution. Other strategies with potential to markedly reduce  both air pollution and 
GHG emissions include: reducing the number of trips using on -road vehicles, shifting away 
from high -emitting on -road vehicles to walking and cycling; switching to cleaner on -road 
transport fuels; improving cooking appliances and usi ng cleaner fuels in new commercial 
buildings.  
Bengaluru can reduce its annual average population -weighted PM 2.5 by 15% to 36.9 µg/m3 in 
2050 in the E&P scenario (for PM 2.5 attributable to sectors included in Pathways, the climate 
action planning modelling tool) ( Figure 87), preventing 2,913 early deaths in 2050 ( Figure 
88). The actions that will be particularly helpful in improving air quality under this scenario 
are related to improving vehicle emission standards, and shifting away from motorcycles in 
the transport sector.  
Figure 87: Air quality implications of climate actions in the E&P scenario  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   408  
 
Figure 87 Air quality implications of climate actions in the E&P scenario. The top 
numbers show the projected baseline PM2.5 concentrations in a given year. The lower 
numbers represent the PM2.5 concentration expected after implementation of the E&P 
scenario. The di fference between the top and lower numbers equates to the reduced 
PM2.5 concentration  in a given year and is represented in brackets next to each lower 
number.  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   409  
Figure 88: Health implications of climate actions in the E&P scenario  
 
Figure 88 Health implications of climate actions in the E&P scenario. The top numbers 
show the projected baseline premature mortality due to ambient PM2.5  exposure in a given 
year. The lower numbers represent the number of premature deaths expected after 
implementation of the E&P scenario. The difference between the top and lower numbers 
equates to the premature deaths avoided in a given year, and is represe nted in brackets 
next to each lower number.  
Under the Ambitious scenario, on -road transport sector climate mitigation strategies —such 
as fuel switching in buses from unclean energy sources (diesel) to electricity —have high 
potential to mitigate GHG emissions and reduce air pollution.  
Implementing the Ambitious scenario is projected to reduce annual average population -
weighted PM2.5  by 11.4 µg/m3 in 2050 ( Figure 89); which would prevent 4,856 early deaths 
in 2050 ( Figure 90). The sectors that have the highest potential to reduce PM2.5  and majority 
of health benefits accrued in that year are establishing vehicle emission standards and fuel 
switching measures in diesel buses, as well as industrial fuel switching measures.  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   410  
Figure 89: Air quality implications of climate actions in the Ambitious scenario  
 
Figure 89. Air quality implications of climate actions in the Ambitious scenario. The top 
numbers show the projected baseline PM2.5  concentrations in a given year. The lower 
numbers represent the PM2.5 concentration expected after implementation of the 
Ambitious scenario. The difference between the top and lower numbers equates to the 
reduced PM 2.5 concertation in a given year and is represented in brackets next to each 
lower number.  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   411  
Figure 90: Health implications of climate actions in the Ambitious scenario  
 
Figure 90 Health implications of climate actions in the Ambitious scenario. The top 
numbers show the projected baseline premature mortality due to ambient PM2.5  
exposure in a given year. The lower numbers represent the number of premature deaths 
expected after implementation of the Ambitious scenario. The difference between the top 
and lower numbers equates to the premature deaths avoided in a given year, and is 
represented in brackets next to each lower number.   
Figure 91: Air quality implications of climate actions in the Extended scenario  
 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   412  
Figure 91 Air quality implications of climate actions in the Extended scenario. The top 
numbers show the projected baseline PM2.5  concentrations in a given year. The lower 
numbers represent the PM2.5 concentration expected after implementation of the Ambitious 
scenario. The difference between the top and lower numbers equates to the reduced PM2.5 
concertation in a given year and is r epresented in brackets next to each lower number.  
Figure 92: Health implications of climate actions in the Extended scenario  
 
Figure 92 Health implications of climate actions in the Extended scenario. The top numbers 
show the projected baseline premature mortality due to ambient PM2.5 exposure in a given 
year. The lower numbers represent the number of premature deaths expected after 
implem entation of the Ambitious scenario. The difference between the top and lower 
numbers equates to the premature deaths avoided in a given year, and is represented in 
brackets next to each lower number.   
An Extended scenario was developed to identify mitigation actions that could potentially 
close the gap between Ambitious Scenario and Deadline 2020 emission reduction targets. 
Under the Extended scenario, climate mitigation strategies such as fuel switchin g in buses 
from unclean energy sources (diesel) to electricity, promoting energy efficiency and fuel 
switching in industries have high potential to mitigate GHG emissions and reduce air 
pollution.  
Implementing the Extended scenario is projected to reduce annual average population -
weighted PM 2.5 by 13 µg/m3 in 2050 ( Figure 90), which would prevent 6,383 early deaths in 
2050 ( Figure 90). The sectors that have the highest potential to reduce PM 2.5 and majority of 
health benefits accrued in that year are establishing vehicle emission standards and fuel 
switching measures in diesel buses, as well as industrial fuel switching and energy efficiency 
measures.   
 

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   413  
Summary  
Mainstreaming air quality work across all relevant city departments will encourage better 
coordination and effective use of resources to accomplish the city’s stated air quality 
management and climate change -related goals. Although air pollution may seem like a future 
issue, the reality is that it is creating health effects and causing early death now. As Bengaluru 
grows, air pollution need not to get worse. Taking action now will prevent early deaths every 
year.  
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   414  
I.  Sector -wise Institutional Mapping  
A representation of r oles and responsibilities of all the departments and agencies involved in the activities of each of the sectors are giv en below . 
Legend:  
Agencies/departments who plays a Primary Role 
Agencies/departments who plays a Secondary Role (Supporting role)  
Agencies/department who plays multiple roles  
 
Energy and Buildings  
Figure 93 Overview of the key  activities and  responsibilities in the energy sector (electricity)  
 Generation
•KPCL
•Hydroelectric power plants, Thermal plants, Diesel, Gas, Wind and Solar
Transmission (trading)
•PCKL -Trading of electricity from generation sources and supply to KPTCL
•IPPs such as GMR, Jindal, Lanco etc.
•KPTCL -Purchase electricity from KPCL & IPPs
Distribution (Supply)
•BESCOM -Purchase electricity from KPTCL and supplies to Bengaluru city consumers
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   415  
Figure 94 Institutional Mapping of the Energy and Buildings sector  
S.No
. Institutions/Responsibilities  
DoE 
KPCL  
PCKL  
IPPs  
KPTCL  
BESCOM  
NPTI -PSTI  
KREDL  
KSPDCL  
KSEI  
KERC  
KAVIKA  
PPAC  
GAIL  
BPCL  
IOCL  
HPCL  
BBMP  
UDD  
DMA  
PWD  
TERI  
CPRI  
1 Overall visioning, 
strateg ising and planning                
                      
          
2 Implementing/Infrastructur
e Development  (Including O 
& M of Infrastructure)                
                    
      
      
3 Service Provider  (Including 
O & M of service)                    
                
            
4 Regulatory and 
Enforcement                
        
            
        
    
5 Raw material provider                                                
6 Training/Performance 
monitoring institutes                                                
7 Public awareness 
programme                                                
 
List of Abbreviations  
KPCL  Karnataka Power Corporation Limited  KSEI  Karnataka State Electrical Inspectorate (GoK owned)  
PCKL  Power Company of Karnataka Limited  KERC  Karnataka Electricity Regulatory Commission  
KPTCL  Karnataka Power Transmission Corporation Limited  KAVIKA  Karnataka Vidyuth Kharkhana Limited (Government undertaking)  
BESCOM  Bengaluru Electricity Supply Company Limited  BBMP  Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike  
NPTI  National power training institute (Central Government owned)  UDD  Urban Development Department  
GAIL  GAIL Gas Limited (PSU - Central Government)  DMA  Directorate of Municipal Administration  
BPCL  Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited (Central Government owned)  KSBDB  Karnataka state biofuel development board  
IOCL  Indian Oil Corporation Limited (GoI owned)  TERI  The Energy and Resources Institute  
HPCL  Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited  (Central Government owned)  CPRI  Central Power Research Institute  
KREDL  Karnataka Renewable Energy Development Limited (Nodal agency -GoK)  DoE  Department of Energy - GoK  
KSPDCL  Karnataka Solar Power Development Corporation Limited (Venture from 
KREDL)  IPP Independent Power Producers  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   416  
 
Transportation  
Figure 95 Institutional Mapping of the Transportation sector  
No.  
Institutions/  
Responsibilities  
BBMP  
Transport 
Department (GoK)  
 UDD  
Police and Traffic 
Police  
DULT/BMLTA  
BDA  
BMRDA  
DTCP  
PWD  
NHAI  
KRDCL  
Smartcity      
-SPV 
BMRCL  
K-RIDE  
Railways  
BMTC  
KSTDC  
BESCOM  
Fuel Suppliers (e.g. 
BPCL,HPCL,IOCL, 
GAIL)  
KUIDFC  
KRDCL  
1 Overall visioning, 
strateg ising and planning                                            
2 Implementing/Infrastructure 
Development (Including O & 
M of Infrastructure)                                        
    
3 Service Provider (Including O 
& M of service)                                            
4 Fuel Suppliers                                            
5 Regulatory and Enforcement                                            
6 Giving Technical 
support/assistance to other 
agencies                                            
7 Financing  (other projects ) - 
Fund Channelisation                                            
 
List of Abbreviations  
UDD  Urban Development Department  BMRCL  Bengaluru Metro Rail Corporation Limited  
DULT  Directorate of Urban Land Transport  K-RIDE  Karnataka - Rail Infrastructure Development Company Limited  
BMLTA  Bangalore Metropolitan Land Transport Authority  KSTDC  Karnataka State Tourism Development Corporation  
BDA  Bangalore Development Authority  BMTC  Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation  
BMRDA  Bangalore Metropolitan Region Development Authority  KRDCL  Karnataka  Road Development Corporation (KRDCL)  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   417  
DTCP  Department of Town and Country Planning (Directorate of Town & Country 
Planning)  BWSSB  Bangalore water supply and sewerage board  
BBMP  Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike  BESCOM  Bangalore Electricity Supply Company Limited  
KUIDFC  Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development and Finance Corporation  KRDCL  Karnataka Road Development Corporation  
 
Solid Waste Management  
Figure 96 Institutional Mapping of the Solid Waste Management sector  
S.No.  Institutions/Responsibilities  
UDD  
BBMP  
KSPCB  
CPCB  
DMA  
KUIDFC  
1 Overall visioning, strateg ising, planning, 
governing and monitoring              
2 Implementing/Infrastructure Development  
(Including O & M of Infrastructure, along with 
rejuvenation and management)              
3 Service Provider  (Including O & M of service)              
4 Regulatory and Enforcement              
5 Consulting/Advisor/technical/knowledge/Funding 
guidance/ support  to implement policies and 
programme s etc.             
6 Training, Performance/Quality monitoring              
 
List of Abbreviations  
BBMP  Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike  DMA  Directorate of Municipal Administration  
UDD  Urban Development Directorate  (Urban Development Department)  KUIDFC  Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Dev & Finance Corporation  
KSPCB  Karnataka State Pollution Control Board  CPCB  Central Pollution Control  Board  
 
 
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   418  
 
Air Quality  
Figure 97 Institutional Mapping of the Air Quality sector  
No.  
Institutions/  
Responsibilities  
KSPCB  
CPCB  
IMD  
BBMP  
BDA  
BESCOM  
DULT/  Transport 
Dept. 
BMTC  
BTP  
Food & Civil 
Supplies Dept.  
KIADB  
KUIDFC  
KPCL  
KREDL  
GAIL  
IOCL  
Health Care 
Facilities  
Air Quality Monitoring Network    
1 Overall visioning, strateg ising and 
planning                                    
2 Implementing/Infrastructure 
Development  (Including O & M)                                    
3 Regulatory and Enforcement                                    
4 Inspection and Quality Control                                    
5 Data Repository                                    
Mitigation                            
6 Overall visioning, strateg ising and 
planning                                    
7 Implementing/Infrastructure 
Development  (Including O & M of 
Infrastructure)                                     
8 Service Provider  (Including O & M of 
service)                                    
9 Policy review & enhancements                                    
Adaption                            
10 Overall visioning, strateg ising and 
planning                                    
11 Implementing/Infrastructure 
Development  (Including O & M of 
Infrastructure)                                    
12 Public Awareness  campaigns                                    
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   419  
 
 
List of Abbreviations  
O&M  Operations and Maintenance  BMTC  Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation  
KSPCB  Karnataka State Pollution Control Board  BTP  Bengaluru Traffic Police  
CPCB  Central Pollution Control  Board  KIADB  Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Board  
IMD  Indian Meteorological Department  KUIDFC  Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development and Finance Corporation  
BBMP  Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike  KPCL  Karnataka Power Corporation Limited  
BDA  Bangalore Development Authority  KREDL  Karnataka Renewable Energy Development  
BESCOM  Bangalore Electricity Supply Company Limited  GAIL  Gas Authority of India Limited  
DULT  Directorate of Urban Land Transport  IOCL  Indian Oil Corporation Limited  
 
 
Water . Wastewater and  Stormwater Management  
Figure 98 Institutional Mapping of the Water, Wastewater and Stormwater Management sector  
S.No  Institutions/Responsibilities  
UDD  
BWSSB  
CGWB  
GWD - KGA  
BBMP  
KSPCB  
KTCDA 
LDA 
EMPRI  
BDA  
KSNDMC  
KSRSAC  
KIADB  
KUIDFC  
Forest Dept.  
1 Overall visioning, strateg ising, planning, governing 
and monitoring               
               
2 Implementing/Infrastructure Development  
(Including O & M of Infrastructure, along with 
rejuvenation and management)               
               
3 Service Provider  (Including O & M of service)                              
4 Regulatory and Enforcement                              
5 Consulting/Advisor/technical/knowledge etc.                             
6 Quality monitoring , Training and performance 
monitoring , research, technical support               
               
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   420  
7 Data repository                              
8 Funding support                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 List of Abbreviations  
BWSSB  Bangalore water supply and sewerage board  
GWD -KGA  Ground water directorate, Karnataka Groundwater authority  
KTCDA  Karnataka Tank Conservation, and Development Authority  
UDD  Urban Development Directorate (Urban Development Department)  
LDA  Lake Development Authority  
KSPCB  Karnataka State Pollution Control Board  
EMPRI  Environmental Management Policy & Research Institute  
BDA  Bangalore Development Authority  
KSNDMC  Karnataka State Natural Disaster Monitoring Centre  
KSRSAC  Karnataka State Remote Sensing Applications Centre  
KIADB  Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Board  
KUIDFC  Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development and Finance Corporation  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   421  
Urban Planning, Greening and  Biodiversity  
Figure 99 Institutional Mapping of the Urban Planning, Greening and Biodiversity sector  
  
Administration  
Planning and 
Development  
Housing  
Utilities and 
Service Providers  
Data Repository  
Disaster 
Monitoring & 
Management  
Environment & 
Biodiversity  
No
.  
Institutions/  
Responsibilities  
BBMP  
UDD  
MPC  
DTCP  
Karnataka State Town 
Planning Board  
 KIADB  
BDA  
BMRDA  
DULT/ BMLTA  
KUIDFC  
Karnataka Housing Board  
Karnataka Slum 
Development Boar d 
Karnataka Slum Clearance  
and Improvement Board)  BWSSB  
BESCOM  
PWD  
Fire Services Dept.  
KRDCL, NHAI  
Transport Providers - 
BMRCL, BMTC,KSRTC  
KGWA  
KSRSAC  
KSNDMC  
KSDMA  
Forest Dept.  
KSPCB  
KBB 
EMPRI  
1 Overall visioning, 
strateg ising, planning 
and coordinating                                                      
2 Implementing/Infrastr
ucture Development  
(Including O & M of 
Infrastructure)                                                      
3 Service Provider  
(Including O & M of 
service)                                                      
4 Regulatory and 
Enforcement                                                      
5 Giving Technical 
support/assistance to 
other agencies                                                      
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   422  
6 Disaster Resilient 
Planning, Management  
and Preparedness                                                      
7 Data repository                                                      
8 Quality Monitoring                                                      
 
 
List of Abbreviations  
O&M  Operations and Maintenance  KSNDMC  Karnataka State Natural Disaster Monitoring Centre  
BDA  Bangalore Development Authority  KSDMA  Karnataka State Disaster Management Authority  
UDD  Urban Development Directorate  (Urban Development Department)  KBB  Karnataka Biodiversity Board  
DTCP  Department of Town and Country Planning (Directorate of Town & Country 
Planning)  EMPRI  Environmental Management & Policy Research Institute  
KIADB  Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Board  BMRDA  Bangalore Metropolitan Region Development Authority  
KUIDFC  Karnataka  Urban  Infrastructure  Development  and Finance Corporation  
Limited   BBMP  Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike  
PWD  Public Works Department  KRDCL  Karnataka Road Development Corporation  
KSRSAC  Karnataka State Remote Sensing Applications Centre  KGWA  Karnataka Ground Water Authority  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   423  
Disaster Management  
Figure 100 Institutional Mapping of the agencies involved in overall Disaster Management  
S. 
No. Key Responsibilities  
Admin  
Public Works  
Urban 
Planning  
Health  
Housing  
Service 
Providers  
Data Centres  
Forestry  
Pollution  DMC, BBMP  
KSDMA  
SWD, BBMP  
SWM, BBMP  
Road Infra, BBMP  
Town Planning, BBMP  
BDA  
PHC  
Govt Hosp  
KHB  
KSDB  
BWSSB  
BESCOM  
Fire Services Dept.  
KGWA  
KRDCL  
Transport : BMRCL,BMTC  
KSNDMC  
IT Cell, BBMP  
KSRSAC  
Forest Cell  
KFD 
KSPCB  
CPCB  
1 Data Repository                                                  
2 Prediction and initial 
information centre                                                  
3 Prime contact/nodal 
centre                                                  
4 Support departments: 
Floods                                                  
5 Support departments: 
Drought                                                  
6 Support departments: 
Heat                                                  
7 Support departments: 
Storms                                                  
8 Support departments: 
Air Pollution                                                  
9 O & M during disaster                                                  
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   424  
Figure 101 Institutional Mapping of the agencies involved in Urban flooding  Management  
S. 
No. Key 
Responsibilities  
Admin  
Public Works  
Urban 
Planning  
Health  
Housing  
Service 
Providers  
Data Centres  
Forestry  
Pollution  DMC, BBMP  
SWD, BBMP  
SWM, BBMP  
Road Infra, BBMP  
Town Planning, BBMP  
BDA  
PHC  
Govt Hosp  
KHB  
KSDB  
BWSSB  
BESCOM  
Fire Services Dept.  
KRDC  
Transport:  BMRCL,BMTC  
KSNDMC  
IT Cell, BBMP  
KSRSAC  
Forest Cell  
KFD 
KSPCB  
CPCB  
1 Data Repository                                              
2 Prediction and 
initial information 
centre                                              
3 Prime 
contact/nodal 
centre                                              
4 Support 
departments: 
Floods                                              
5 Support 
departments: 
Storms                                              
6 O & M during 
disaster                                              
 
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   425  
List of Abbreviation s 
DMC  Disaster Management Cell, BBMP  BESCOM  Bangalore Electricity Supply Company Limited  
BBMP  Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike  KGWA  Karnataka Ground Water Authority  
SWD  Storm Water Management Cell, BBMP  KRDCL  Karnataka Road Development Corporation  
SWM  Solid Waste Man agement Cell, BBMP  KSRSAC  Karnataka State Remote Sensing Applications Centre  
BDA  Bangalore Development Authority  KSNDMC  Karnataka State Natural Disaster Monitoring Centre  
PHC  Public Health Centre  KFD  Karnataka Forest Department  
KHB  Karnataka Housing Board  KSPCB  Karnataka State Pollution Control Board  
KSDB  Karnataka Slum Development Board  CPCB  Central Pollution Control  Board  
BWSSB  Bangalore water supply and sewerage board  KSDMA  Karnataka State Disaster Management Authority  
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   426  
J. Climate budget  
J.1. C40 climate budget pilot programme   
Cities around the world are adopting climate budgeting as a governance system to turn climate 
commitments into funded and measurable actions across city government. Here are some key 
points on why your city should consider climate budgeting: (Knowledge hub 21AD)  
• Mainstreaming action and accountability: Climate budgets embed climate 
considerations into decision -making across all city departments, ensuring that climate 
action becomes mainstream in every government agency. Science -based emissions 
reduction targets an d caps on emissions are integrated into the city's main budgeting 
process, holding all parts of government accountable for their climate impact.  
• Ownership by the finance department: Climate budgets place responsibility for 
delivering climate action with the city's chief financial officers (CFOs). The finance 
department collaborates closely with the team leading the city's climate change 
response, e nsuring that spending plans are realistic in reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions.  
• Concrete actions and financing: Climate budgeting turns long -term climate targets 
into annual delivery plans, priorit ising and financing the most effective actions. It sets 
year -by-year emission caps aligned with long -term targets, specifying policies, costs, 
responsible entities, and expected emission reductions. This approach provides 
transparency, accountability, and a way to monitor the impact of climate actions.  
• Different from carbon budgeting: While related, climate budgeting is not the same as 
carbon budgeting. A carbon budget defines the cumulative amount of CO2 emissions 
permitted within a specified timeframe, while climate budgeting integrates the long -
term e mission reduction target into a city's operations and policies.  
• Visibility of climate leadership: Climate budgets make climate action transparent and 
systematic, stimulating public awareness, discussion, and support for climate policies. 
They elevate climate issues on the political agenda and demonstrate leadership, gi ving 
cities leverage in discussions with national and regional governments, businesses, 
academia, and other stakeholders.  
• By adopting climate budgeting, cities can integrate climate considerations into their 
decision -making processes, priorit ise actions, and demonstrate their commitment to 
climate leadership.  
The C40 Cities Climate Budget Pilot is an initiative undertaken by the C40 Cities network, a 
global network of cities committed to addressing climate change. The pilot programme  aims 
to assess the alignment of city budgets with climate action goals. It focuses on evaluating the 
extent to which city budgets support and promote climate -friendly policies and initiatives.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   427  
 
Source: C40 Climate Budget Pilot  
 
There are several key components and assessment methods used in the C40 Cities Climate 
Budget Pilot:  
• Ex-ante assessment : This assessment is conducted before the implementation of 
city budgets. It involves analysing  the proposed budgets and identifying how they align 
with climate action objectives. This assessment helps identify potential gaps and areas 
where climate considerations can be integrated into budgetary decisions.  
• Ex-post assessment:  This assessment takes place after the implementation of city 
budgets. It evaluates the actual outcomes and impacts of the budgetary decisions on 
climate action. It provides insights into the effectiveness of the allocated funds, 
identifies success stories , and highlights areas that require improvement for future 
budget cycles.  
• Project Climate Assessment:  This component focuses on evaluating specific 
projects and initiatives funded through city budgets. It assesses the greenhouse gas 
emissions reduction potential, climate resilience, and sustainability aspects of these 
projects. This assessment ensures tha t the projects align with climate targets and 
contribute to overall climate action efforts.  
• Carbon budget:  A carbon budget refers to the total amount of greenhouse gases that 
can be emitted within a specific timeframe to limit global warming to a certain level. 
The C40 Cities Climate Budget Pilot considers carbon budgets as a framework for 
evaluating the align ment of city budgets with climate action. By comparing the actual 
emissions associated with budgetary decisions against the defined carbon budgets, the 
initiative can determine if the budgets are in line with the emissions reduction goals.  
Through these assessments and considerations, the C40 Cities Climate Budget Pilot provides 
cities with valuable insights into how their budgetary decisions impact climate action. It helps 
city officials identify areas for improvement, make informed decisio ns, allocate resources 
effectively, and promote sustainable and climate -friendly development. The pilot programme  

 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   428  
ultimately aims to enhance the integration of climate considerations into budgetary processes, 
enabling cities to take more effective action against climate change.  
J.2. Mumbai – Draft Climate budget template  
Table 45 Climate Budget Template  
A B C D E F G H I J 
Fund 
Code  G.L. 
Code  Cost 
Centre 
Code  Name 
of 
Work  Work 
executed 
by Estimated 
cost of the 
work  Revised 
Estimates 
2022 -2023 
(In 
thousands)  Budget 
Estimates 
2023 -
2024 (In 
thousands)  *Alignment 
with MCAP 
Action 
Track  # 
Description 
of intended 
work  
          
          
          
          
          
          
  
# All work items have to be described in as much detail as possible under column J. Please 
add a quantitative description of the work/activity mentioned in terms of potentially what can 
be achieved within the next financial year: for example, length of foo tpath to be built, kWh of 
solar capacity to be installed, number of electric vehicles to be purchased, area of green open 
space to be created, number of composting pits to be setup, number of public toilets to be built 
etc. Additionally, please also descri be some qualitative features of the work mentioned: for 
example integration of road safety in street infrastructure, integration of nature -based 
solutions while creating open green spaces, using passive design strategies like cool roofs in 
buildings, integ ration of flood mitigation measures in road work activities, using permeable 
paver blocks for footpaths/public spaces/parks etc.  
 
  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   429  
Glossary  
Term  Definition  
1.5° C warming 
scenario  The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  (IPCC ) defines the 1.5°  C 
warming scenario as the limit to which the average global temperature 
should be allowed to increase above pre -industrial levels. This scenario is 
believed to be a threshold beyond which there will be significant negative 
impacts on the environment, human  health, and socio -economic systems.  
5AR  The IPCC 5th Assessment Report (AR5) is a comprehensive report on climate 
change. The report provides the most up -to-date assessment of the scientific, 
technical, and socio -economic aspects of climate change, including its 
impacts, future projections, and mitigation options. The report was written 
by hundreds of leading scientists from around the world and is widely 
regarded as the most authoritative source of scientific information o n climate 
change.  
Activity data Greenhouse Gas Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard 
(GHG -GPC) defines activity data as the quantitative information on the 
activities or processes that result in greenhouse gas emissions or removals. 
This includes data on fuel consumption, energy use, production volumes, 
and other relevant parameters that are used to  calculate emission factors and 
estimate greenhouse gas emissions from various sources and sectors.  
Adaptation  As per IPCC, adaptation is a process of adjustment to actual or expected 
climate and its effects. In human systems, adaptation seeks to moderate or 
avoid harm or exploit beneficial opportunities. In some natural systems, 
human intervention may facilitate adjustment to the expected cli mate and its 
effects.  
Adaptive capacity  The ability of an individual or a system or the local governing body to adapt 
themselves to the needs of the region and the people during hazard 
occurrence and to respond in a timely efficient manner thereby reducing loss 
and damage.  
Aerobic processes  As per the United States Environmental Protection Agency ( US EPA ), 
aerobic processes are typically associated with wastewater treatment, where 
aerobic bacteria are used to break down organic matter and other 
contaminants. These aerobic processes involve the use of oxygen to support 
the metabolism of bacteria, which in turn  help to reduce the level of 
pollutants and make the wastewater safe to discharge or recycle. Examples of 
aerobic processes used in wastewater treatment include activated sludge, 
trickling  filters, and rotating biological contactors.  
Ambitious 
scenario  GHG -GPC defines an ambitious scenario as a hypothetical scenario that 
assumes a company or sector will implement transformational actions, such 
as adopting new technologies or business models, to achieve a significant 
reduction in emissions beyond what is required by existing regulations or 
market expectations. This scenario is used to assess the potential for 
achieving deep decarbon isation and contributing to long -term climate goals.  
Anaerobic 
processes  As per the US EPA, anaerobic processes are biological processes occurring in 
the absence of oxygen that convert organic matter into methane and other 
gases, volatile fatty acids, and end products such as carbon dioxide, 
ammonia, and hydrogen sulphide. Thes e processes include anaerobic 
digestion, fermentation, and methanogenesis, and are used to treat organic 
waste, producing biogas as a renewable energy source. Anaerobic processes 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   430  
can also occur in natural environments, for example, in the gut of animals 
and in wetlands.  
Biogenic carbon 
dioxide  As per IPCC, biogenic carbon dioxide refers to the carbon dioxide emissions 
that are released during the burning of biomass (organic matter derived from 
plants, animals, and microorganisms). Biogenic carbon dioxide is therefore 
distinct from fossil fuel emissions, which are derived from carbon that was 
stored in the Earth's crust over millions of years.  
Biological nutrient 
removal  As per the US EPA , Biological nutrient removal (BNR) is a wastewater 
treatment process that incorporates biological mechanisms to remove 
nitrogen and phosphorus from wastewater. The process util ises 
microorganisms that convert the nitrogen and phosphorus compounds in the 
wastewater into gas or solid forms that can be removed from the water.  
Blue -green 
infrastructure  According to the European Commission, blue -green infrastructure is “an 
interconnected network of natural and semi -natural areas, which can provide 
multiple benefits for society and the environment, such as water retention, 
biodiversity conservation, recreation and aesthetic value, as well as 
opportunities for economic deve lopment and job creation ” 
Bulk waste 
generators  As per the Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016, bulk waste generators are 
defined as any person or establishment that generates more than 100 kg of 
waste per day. This includes commercial establishments such as hotels, 
restaurants, hospitals, educational institutions, offices, ma rkets, and 
residential complexes with more than 20 units.  
Business as usual 
scenario  As per GHG -GPC, a business -as-usual  scenario refers to a projection of a 
company's greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions that assumes no change in 
business practices or adoption of new emission reduction measures. It is a 
baseline against which a company can measure the effectiveness of its 
emissi on reduction efforts.  
Capacity building  According to the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), capacity 
building “is the process through which individuals, organ isations, and 
societies obtain, strengthen, and maintain the capabilities to set and achieve 
their own development objectives over time ”  
Carbon dioxide 
equivalent (CO2e)  The IPCC defines CO2e as “the amount of CO2 that would have the same 
global warming potential (GWP) as a given amount of another GHG, taking 
into account the difference in their radiative properties and atmospheric 
lifetimes ” 
Carbon 
sequestration  The process of capturing, removing and storing Carbon dioxide (CO2) from 
the earth’s atmosphere.  
Circular economy  The United Nations (UN) defines a circular economy as “an industrial system 
that is restorative and regenerative by intention and design ” (UN, 2020). It is 
an economic model that aims to minim ise waste and maxim ise the use of 
resources by keeping products, components, and materials at their highest 
value for as long as possible.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   431  
Climate  The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) defines climate as 
“the average weather conditions in a place over a long period of time, usually 
30 years or more ” 
Climate change  The IPCC defines climate change as a long -term change in the average state 
of the climate, or in its variability, that persists for decades or longer. This 
includes changes in temperature, precipitation, sea level, and other climate 
variables, resulting from n atural and human causes, that have significant 
impacts on natural and human systems.  
Climate change 
risk The IPCC defines climate change risk as the potential for adverse effects, 
such as damage or harm, resulting from climate change impacts and their 
interactions with vulnerabilities and exposure of human and natural systems. 
Climate change risk is assessed by c onsidering the likelihood, magnitude, 
and timing of impacts, and can be mitigated through adaptation and 
mitigation actions.   
Co-Benefits  The positive effects that a policy or measure aimed at one objective  
might have on other objectives, irrespective of the net effect on overall  social 
welfare. Co -benefits are often subject to uncertainty and depend on local 
circumstances and implementation practices, among other factors. Co -
benefits are also referred to as ancillary benefits.  
Decarbon ised 
electricity grid  The International Energy Agency (IEA) defines decarbon isation as “the 
process of reducing greenhouse gas emissions, particularly carbon dioxide 
(CO2), from the energy system, by shifting from fossil fuels to low -carbon 
energy sources and improving energy efficiency. ” 
Direct emissions  The IPCC defines direct emissions as emissions from sources that are owned 
or controlled by the reporting entity. Direct emissions include emissions 
from combustion of fossil fuels, from industrial processes, and from 
biological sources such as enteric fermentation or manure management.  
Disaster  Severe alterations in the normal functioning of a community or a society due 
to hazardous physical events interacting with vulnerable social  
conditions, leading to widespread adverse human, material, economic  
or environmental effects that require immedia te emergency response  
to satisfy critical human needs and that may require external support  
for recovery  
Drought  
  A drought is a long, dry period that causes a water imbalance. Different types 
of drought  affect crop production or water supplies. A megadrought is an 
abnormally long drought , lasting a decade or more.  
Emission factor  The IPCC defines emission factor as a representative value that relates the 
quantity of a pollutant released into the atmosphere to an activity associated 
with the release of that pollutant. Emission factors are used to estimate 
greenhouse gas emissions fr om various sectors and activities, such as energy 
production, transportation, and industrial processes.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   432  
Emission scenario  As per the IPCC, predicting future emissions of substances (e.g., greenhouse 
gases, aerosols) based on factors such as economic development, 
technological advancement, and land use. These predictions are then used to 
create climate projections through modelling . 
Exposure  The presence of people in a region that could potentially host hazards. It also 
refers to the adaptive capacity of an individual in the occurrence of the 
hazard.  
Fossil fuel  The IPCC defines fossil fuels as “fuels derived from geological sources, 
including coal, oil, and natural gas, formed from the remains of dead plants 
and animals that have been transformed by geological processes. ” 
GHG  The IPCC defines greenhouse gases (GHGs) as “gases that absorb and emit 
radiation within the thermal infrared range, leading to a warming effect on 
the climate system. ” The main greenhouse gases of concern in the context of 
climate change are carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide 
(N2O), and fluorinated gases (such as hydrofluorocarbons and sulphur  
hexafluoride). These gases are emitted through various human activities, 
including the burning of fossil fuels, deforestation, and agriculture.  
GHG emissions 
inventory  An estimate of emissions from the sources and sinks within a defined spatial 
and temporal dimension  
GHG -GPC  GHG -GPC is a widely used and internationally recogn ised framework for 
measuring, managing, and reporting greenhouse gas emissions and removals 
from business activities. The GHG -GPC provides standard ised 
methodologies and reporting requirements for companies and organ isations 
to track and report their emissions, and to set emissions reduction targets 
and strategies.  
Global warming  Global warming is the long -term heating of Earth’s surface observed since 
the pre -industrial period (between 1850 and 1900) due to human activities, 
primarily fossil fuel burning, which increases heat -trapping greenhouse gas 
levels in Earth’s atmosphere.    
Global Warming 
Potential  Greenhouse gases warm the earth by absorbing energy and decreasing the 
rate at which the energy escapes the atmosphere. These gases differ in their 
ability to absorb energy, that is, they have various radiative efficiencies. They 
also differ in their atmospheric residence times. Each gas has a 
specific  global warming  potential (GWP), which allows comparisons of the 
amount of energy the emissions of 1 ton of a gas will absorb over a given time 
period, usually a 100 -year averaging time, compared with the emissions of 1 
ton of CO2.  
GPC BASIC  level  The GPC BASIC  level is a simplified version of the Greenhouse Gas Protocol 
Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard (GPC), designed for small 
and medium -sized enterprises (SMEs) and organ isations with limited 
capacity for greenhouse gas accounting. The GPC BASIC  level provides a 
standard ised framework for calculating and reporting greenhouse gas 
emissions from a limited set of emission sources, such as energy use, 
business travel, and waste disposal.  
Green buildings  According to the US EPA , a green building “is a structure that is 
environmentally responsible and resource -efficient throughout its life -cycle. ” 
This includes the design, construction, operation, maintenance, renovation, 
and demolition of the building.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   433  
Grid electricity  Grid electricity, as defined by the Greenhouse Gas Protocol Corporate 
Accounting and Reporting Standard (GHG -GPC), refers to electricity that is 
purchased and supplied from the power grid, which may be generated from 
various sources such as fossil fuels, n uclear, hydropower, wind, solar, and 
others.  
GRIHA  GRIHA (Green Rating for Integrated Habitat Assessment) is a green building 
rating system developed by The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI) in 
India. The GRIHA rating system evaluates the environmental performance of 
buildings and their impact on occup ants' health and well -being. The system 
provides a framework for the evaluation of the environmental performance 
of buildings across India.  
Ground water 
recharge  The process by which external water is added to the zone of saturation  
of an aquifer, either directly into a geologic formation that traps the  
water or indirectly by way of another formation  
Ground water 
replenishment  According to the United Nations, groundwater replenishment is “the process 
of increasing the amount of water that enters an aquifer, either naturally or 
artificially, to augment the available groundwater resources. ” 
Hazard  Hazard refers to th e probability of occurrence of extreme weather events 
either due to natural causes or due to human interventions resulting in loss. 
The loss could be loss of life , injury, infrastructure damage , loss of natural 
resources, or loss of livelihood.  
IGBC  The Indian Green Building Council (IGBC) is a non -profit organ isation that 
promotes sustainable buildings and cities in India. As per the IGBC, green 
buildings are “energy -efficient, water -efficient, resource -efficient, and 
environment -friendly. ” They incorporate features such as efficient lighting 
and appliances, renewable energy sources, water -efficient plumbing fixtures 
and irrigation systems, low -emitting materials, and sustainable landscaping. 
The IGBC offers a rating system for green buildin gs in Indi a, known as the 
LEED India rating system.  
Impact  Effects on natural and human systems. In this report, the term impacts  
is used primarily to refer to the effects on natural and human systems  
of extreme weather and climate events and of climate change. Impacts  
generally refer to effects on lives, livelihoods, health, ecosystems, economies, 
societies, cultures, services and  infrastructure due to the interaction of 
climate changes or hazardous climate events occurring within a specific time 
period and the vulnerability of an exposed society or system.  
Impacts are also referred to as consequences and outcomes. The impacts  
of climate change on geophysical systems, including floods, drought  
and sea level rise, are a subset called physical impacts . 
Inclusivity  The term generally refers to the principle of ensuring that all individuals and 
communities have equal access and opportunities to participate in decision -
making processes related to climate change mitigation and adaptation, and 
to benefit from the outcomes  of these processes. Inclusivity also emphas ises 
the importance of addressing the needs and perspectives of marginal ised and 
vulnerable groups, such as low -income communities, indigenous peoples, 
women, and youth.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   434  
Indirect emissions  This term refers to e missions that are a consequence of the activities within 
well-defined  
boundaries of, for instance, a region, an economic sector, a company  
or a process, but which occur outside the specified boundaries. For  
example, emissions are described as indirect if they relate to the use of  
heat but physically arise outside the boundaries of the heat user, or to  
electricity production but physically arise  outside of the boundaries of  
the power supply sector . 
IPCC guidelines  The IPCC guidelines are a set of internationally recogn ised scientific and 
technical standards for assessing and reporting GHG  emissions and 
removals, and for conducting climate change vulnerability and mitigation 
assessments. The guidelines are developed and periodically updated by the 
IPCC, with the participation of scientists, experts, and governments from 
around the world.  
ISWM  The IPCC defines Integrated Solid Waste Management (ISWM) as a waste 
management approach that combines various waste management practices, 
such as waste reduction, segregation, collection, recycling, composting, and 
disposal, in a coordinated and systemati c manner to minim ise the 
environmental, social, and economic impacts of waste generation and 
management.  
IUWM  The IPCC defines Integrated Urban Water Management (IUWM) as a 
planning and management process that seeks to reconcile the diverse and 
conflicting demands for water resources in urban areas by integrating water 
supply, wastewater management, stormwater management, and other water -
related activit ies to ensure sustainable and efficient use of water resources.  
Just Transition  Just Transition refers to a set of principles and practices aimed at ensuring 
that the transition to a low -carbon and sustainable economy is fair and 
inclusive, and that no individual or group is left behind. It emphas ises the 
need to address the social and economic impacts of the transition, including 
job losses and economic dislocation, and to provide support and 
opportunities for workers and communities affected by the shift away from 
fossil fuels. Just Transition also  seeks to address broader issues of social and 
environmental justice, including the disproportionate impacts of climate 
change on vulnerable and marginal ised communities.  
Land surface 
temperature  According to the UN, land surface temperature is “the radiative skin 
temperature of the Earth’s surface, measured at a specific time and under 
specific conditions, such as cloud cover, solar radiation, and soil moisture. ” 
LEED  LEED stands for Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design. It is a 
green building certification programme  that was developed by the US Green 
Building Council (USGBC) to promote sustainable building practices and 
reduce the environmental impact of buildings.  
Low carbon  IPCC defines low carbon as a term used to describe an energy system or 
technology that emits lower amounts of carbon dioxide (CO2) and other 
GHGs than conventional alternatives.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   435  
Mitigation  This term refers to a  human intervention to reduce the sources or enhance 
the sinks of GHGs. This report assesses human interventions to reduce the 
sources of other substances which may contribute  
directly or indirectly to limiting climate change, including, for example,  
the reduction of particulate matter emissions that can directly alter  
the radiation balance (e.g., black carbon) or measures that control  
emissions of carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, volatile organic compounds 
and other pollutants tha t can alter the concentration of tropospheric ozone , 
which has an indirect effect on the climate . 
Net zero  Net zero means achieving a balance between the amount of GHG  emissions 
produced and the amount removed from the atmosphere, resulting in no 
further increase in the concentration of these gases in the atmosphere. This 
balance can be achieved through a combination of reducing emissions and 
increasing carbon removal e fforts, such as afforestation, reforestation, and 
carbon capture and storage technologies.  
Non -specified 
sources (NSS)  Non -specified sources are all the remaining emissions from facilities 
consuming electricity not specified elsewhere . A portion of Bengaluru’s 
energy demand is being catered to by an open -access market , which  allows 
customers to choose from a few competitive power companies, rather than 
being forced to buy power from the local utility monopoly. Due to limited/no 
information on the open access consumers and their suppliers, the grid 
electricity consumed through  open access has been bucketed into the non -
speci fied source.  
Paris Agreement  The Paris Agreement is an international treaty aimed at addressing climate 
change. It was adopted at the 21st Conference of the Parties (COP21) to the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 
December 2015, and entered into force o n November 4, 2016. The Paris 
Agreement has been signed by 196 countries and ratified by 191. Its goal is to 
limit global warming to well below 2 degrees Celsius above pre -industrial 
levels, while pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5 d egrees 
Celsius. To achieve this, countries have agreed to set their own targets for 
reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, known as nationally determined 
contributions (NDCs).  
Pathways model  Pathways is a model developed by C40 Cities that can be used to integrate 
emission reduction scenarios.  
RCP  Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs), make predictions for varied 
scenarios of how concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere will 
change in future as a result of human  activities. RCPs try to capture the 
consequences of changes in greenhouse gas concentration on the earth 
systems, simulate the response of climate systems and provide a wide range 
of models. Scenarios include a stringent mitigation scenario (RCP2.6), two 
intermediate scenarios (RCP4.5 and RCP6.0), and one scenario with very  
high GHG emissions (RCP8.5).  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   436  
Refuse -derived 
fuel  Refuse -derived fuel (RDF) is a type of fuel derived from municipal solid 
waste (MSW) and other forms of waste. It is produced by processing MSW to 
remove non -combustible materials and creating a uniform fuel product that 
can be burned in facilities that generate energy through combustion.  
 
RDF is often used as a supplement to traditional fossil fuels, such as coal or  
oil, in industrial boilers and power plants. This reduces the amount of fossil 
fuel required for energy production and helps to divert waste f rom landfills.  
Resilience  The ability of a system, its people and its economy to anticipate, absorb and 
accommodate or recover from a hazardous event in a timely and efficient 
manner.  
Scientific waste 
management  As per the UNEP, scientific waste management involves “the collection, 
transportation, treatment, and disposal of waste, as well as efforts to 
minim ise waste generation and promote recycling, reuse, and recovery of 
valuable resources. ” It also includes measures to reduce the environmental 
impact of waste disposal, such as using landfills that meet stringent safety 
and environmental standards, and implementing measures to prevent 
pollution and contamination of soil, water, and air.  
Sink  Any process, activity or mechanism that removes a greenhouse gas  
(GHG), an aerosol or a precursor of a GHG or aerosol from the atmosphere  
Social equity  The National League of Cities, a US-based advocacy organ isation for cities 
and towns, defines social equity as “the fair, just and equitable management 
of all institutions serving the public directly or by contract; the fair, just and 
equitable distribution of public services and implementation of public policy; 
and the commitment to promote fairness, justice and eq uity in the formation 
of public policy. ” 
Sustainable 
Development 
Goals The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are a set of 17 global goals 
established by the United Nations in 2015, as part of the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development. The SDGs are intended to be a universal call to 
action to end poverty, protect the planet, and ensure that all people can enjoy 
peace and prosperity by 2030.  
Urban heat island  According to  the US EPA , urban heat island refers to the “phenomenon in 
which metropolitan areas tend to be warmer than their surrounding rural 
areas, due to human activities and the built environment ”. This can result in 
a number of environmental and health impacts, including increased energy 
consumption, decreased air quality, and adverse health effects.  
Vulnerability  The tendency of a region and/or an individual to be exposed to climate 
hazards and its impact. It would also encompass the extent of exposure of an 
individual to a particular hazard based on the extent of exposure.  
Vulnerable 
hotspots  The IPCC defines vulnerable hotspots as geographic areas that are 
particularly susceptible to the impacts of climate change due to their high 
exposure to climate hazards and high levels of vulnerability. Vulnerable 
hotspots can include areas with high population density, poverty, weak 
governance, limited access to resources, and low levels of adaptive capacity.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   437  
Water security  The United Nations defines water security as “the capacity of a population to 
safeguard sustainable access to adequate quantities of acceptable quality 
water for sustaining livelihoods, human well -being, and socio -economic 
development, for ensuring protection against water -borne pollution and 
water -related disasters, and for preserving ecosystems in a climate of peace 
and political stability. ” 
Zero waste  Zero waste generally refers to the goal of minim ising waste production and 
maxim ising recycling, reuse, and composting to reduce the amount of waste 
sent to landfills and incinerators.  
 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   438  
Bibliography  
• Aayog, Niti. 2022. “Harnessing Technology for Mitigating Water Woes in the City of 
Bengaluru - IOPscience.” 2022. https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1742 -
6596/1427/1/012004.  
• ADBI. 2020. “Unleashing Market -Based Approaches to Drive Energy Efficiency 
Interventions in India: An Analysis of the Perform, Achieve, Trade (PAT) Scheme | Asian 
Development Bank.” 2020. https://www.adb.org/publications/unleashing -market -
based -approaches -drive -energy -efficiency -interventions -india.  
• Agnihotri, Geeta, R. Venugopal, and Hr Hatwar. 2013. “CLIMATOLOGY OF 
THUNDERSTORMS AND SQUALLS OVER BANGALORE.” MAUSAM  64 (4): 735 –40. 
https://doi.org/10.54302/mausam.v64i4.759.  
• Bali, Nidhi, Siddhartha Vermani, and Vaishali Mishra. 2020. “Electricity Access and 
Benchmarking of Distribution Utilities in India, New Delhi: Smart Power India -Powered 
by The Rockefeller Foundation.” 
http://www.indiaenvironmentportal.org.in/files/file/el ectricity%20access%20in%20i
ndia.pdf.  
• Bank, World. 2022. “Climate Explainer: Climate Change and Air Pollution.” World Bank. 
2022. https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2022/09/01/what -you-need -to-
know -about -climate -change -and-air-pollution.  
• BBMP. 2015. “Solid Waste Management Overview.” 
https://site.bbmp.gov.in/documents/Overview.pdf#:~:text=A%20separate%20system
%20has%20been%20put%20in%20place,utilize%20the%20services%20of%20BBMP
%20Empanelled%20Service%20Providers.  
• ——— . Website. “Lakes Department.” Website. 
https://site.bbmp.gov.in/departmentwebsites/Lakes/index.html.  
• BBMP, and WRI India. 2015. “BBMP Restructuring - Expert Committee.” 2015. 
http://www.bbmprestructuring.org/.  
• Bedi, Tanya Kaur, and Shankha Pratim Bhattacharya. 2021. “An Investigative Study on 
Perceived Indoor Air Quality During COVID -19 Lockdown in India.” Journal of The 
Institution of Engineers (India): Series A  102 (4): 885 –900. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40030 -021 -00546 -9. 
• Bengaluru, Clean. 2019. “BBMP Road Map.” https://data -
opencity.sgp1.cdn.digitaloceanspaces.com/Documents/Recent/Bengaluru -BBMP -SWM -
Road -Map -July-2019.pdf.  
• BIOME. 2017. “Bangalore -and-Its-Lakes -02-Lakes.” https://biometrust.org/wp -
content/uploads/2017/01/Bangalore -and-its-Lakes -02-Lakes.pdf.  
• ——— . 2021. “Million Recharge Wells for Bengaluru.” 
http://bengaluru.urbanwaters.in/wp -content/uploads/sites/3/2021/03/Million -
Wells -Campaign.pdf.  
• Bureau, Bangalore Mirror. 2022. “Bengaluru Doesn’t Have a Concrete Plan.” Bangalore 
Mirror. 2022. https://bangaloremirror.indiatimes.com/bangalore/cover -
story/bengaluru -doesnt -have -a-concrete -plan/articleshow/88818640.cms.  
• Bureau, BL Bengaluru. 2022. “Karnataka Poised to Lead the Electric Vehicle Revolution: 
CII.” September 22, 2022. 
https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/companies/karnataka -poised -to-lead -the-
electric -vehicle -revolution -cii/article65922959.ece.  
• Bureau, ET. 2017. “Bengaluru Traffic Jams: Number of Vehicles in Bengaluru Rises by a 
Mind -Boggling 6,099% in 40 Years - The Economic Times.” 2017. 
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/politics -and-nation/number -of-vehicles -
in-bengaluru -rises -by-a-min d-boggling -6099 -in-40-years/articleshow/57807459.cms.  
• BWSSB. 2017. “BWSSB Vision Document.” https://bwssb.karnataka.gov.in/storage/pdf -
files/documents/Vision%20Document%202050%20%20new.pdf.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   439  
• ——— . Website. “BWSSB.” Website. https://bwssb.karnataka.gov.in/info -
1/About+BWSSB/en.  
• C40 Cities. 2018. “Article Detail.” 2018. 
https://www.c40knowledgehub.org/s/article/Climate -Change -Risk -Assessment -
Guidance?language=en_US.  
• “Cabinet Approves India’s Updated Nationally Determined Contribution to Be 
Communicated to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.” 2022. 
2022. https://pib.gov.in/pib.gov.in/Pressreleaseshare.aspx?PRID=1847812.  
• CEEW. 2021. “Are Indian Homes Ready for Electric Cooking?” CEEW. September 23, 
2021. https://www.ceew.in/publications/are -indian -homes -ready -for-electric -cooking -
transition.  
• CEEW, CEF |. 2019. “Open Access.” CEF | CEEW. 2019. 
https://www.ceew.in/cef/masterclass/explains/open -access.  
• Census. 2011. “Census 2011 India.” 2011. https://www.census2011.co.in/.  
• CGWB. 2015. “Report of the Ground Water Resource Estimation Committee.” 
http://cgwb.gov.in/Documents/GEC2015_Report_Final%2030.10.2017.pdf.  
• Chronicle , Deccan.  2017. “Bengaluru Has Lost Nearly 18,000 Trees over Last Nine 
Years.” 2017. https://www.deccanchronicle.com/lifestyle/pets -and-
environment/100317/bengaluru -has-lost-nearly -18000 -trees -over -last-nine -
years.html.  
• Chu, Eric, and Kavya Micheal. 2019. “Recognition in Urban Climate Justice: Marginality 
and Exclusion of Migrants in Indian Cities.” 2019. 
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/0956247818814449.  
• Cities, C40. 2016. “Deadline 2020: How Cities Will Get the Job Done.” 2016. 
https://www.c40knowledgehub.org/s/article/Deadline -2020 -How -cities -will-get-the-
job-done?language=en_US.  
• ——— . 2018a. “C40 Climate Action Planning Resource Centre.” 2018. 
https://resourcecentre.c40.org/resources/inclusive -climate -action.  
• ——— . 2018b. “Climate Change Risk Assessment Guidance and Screening Template.” 
2018. https://www.c40knowledgehub.org/s/article/Climate -Change -Risk -Assessment -
Guidance?language=en_US.  
• ——— . 2021. “Manual for Climate Budgets as a Governance Tool.” 2021. 
https://www.c40knowledgehub.org/s/article/Manual -for-climate -budgets -as-a-
governance -tool?language=en_US.  
• ——— . C40. “Our Cities.” C40 Cities. C40. https://www.c40.org/cities/.  
• “Climate Budgets.” C40 Cities. C40 Cities. 
https://www.c40knowledgehub.org/s/topic/0TO1Q000000x2DNWAY/climate -
budgets?language=en_US.  
• Climate Leadership Group, C40 cities. 2022. “Pathways Air Quality (Pathways -AQ).” 
2022. https://www.c40knowledgehub.org/s/article/Pathways -Air-Quality -Pathways -
AQ?language=en_US.  
• CMP -Bengaluru. 2020. “Comprehensive Mobility Plan.” 
https://data.opencity.in/dataset/ddc35621 -d3c2 -49d7 -a14e -
06425f3cb336/resource/58f2bd6c -2b93 -4300 -8a14 -2929430dcc34/download/dult -
comprehensive -mobility -plan -2020.pdf.  
• CMP -Mumbai. 2016. “Comprehensive Mobility Plan for Greater Mumbai.” Docslib. 2016. 
https://docslib.org/doc/4840654/comprehensive -mobility -plan -for-greater -mumbai.  
• Community, Anaerobic Digestion. 2020. “Advantages and Disadvantages of Anaerobic 
Treatment vs Aerobic.” 2020. https://anaerobic -digestion.com/advantages -and-
disadvantages -of-anaerobic -wastewater -treatment/.  
• Connection, Climate change. 2014. “Greenhouse Gases (GHG) | Climate Change 
Connection.” Climate Change Connection | Connecting Manitobans to Climate Change 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   440  
Facts and Solutions. August 13, 2014. 
https://climatechangeconnection.org/science/climate_causes/greenhouse -gases -ghg/.  
• Correspondent, Special. 2017. “Availability, Access, Maintenance Issues Ail Public 
Spaces: Survey.” The Hindu , December 1, 2017, sec. Bengaluru. 
https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/bangalore/public -spaces -bangalore -
janagraha -survey/article21245129.ece.  
• ——— . 2021. “BMRCL Looks for Land on Outskirts of Bengaluru for Compensatory 
Afforestation.” The Hindu , June 25, 2021, sec. Bengaluru. 
https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/bangalore/bmrcl -looks -to-land -on-outskirts -
of-bengaluru -for-compensatory -afforestation/article34960546.ece.  
• CSTEP. 2022. “Emission Inventory and Pollution Reduction Strategies for Bengaluru.” 
2022. https://www.cstep.in/publications -details.php?id=1985.  
• Delhi. 2019. “Deloitte City Mobility Index.” 
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/insights/us/articles/4331_Deloitte -City -
Mobility -Index/Delhi_GlobalCityMobility_WEB.pdf.  
• Department, City Planning. 2021. “Kuala Lumpur CAP 2050.” 
https://cdn.locomotive.works/sites/5ab410c8a2f42204838f797e/content_entry5ab41
0faa2f42204838f7990/5b4e04e374782004ac0c8ac2/files/C40_KLCAP2050_viewing -
only -MR-single.pdf?1626096224.  
• Department, Finance. 2023. “Karnataka Budget 2023 -24.” 2023. 
https://finance.karnataka.gov.in/info -2/2023 -24/Budget+Volumes+2023 -24/en.  
• Department, Karnataka Gazetteer. 1990. “Bangalore District 1990 (English) - Karnataka 
Gazetteer Department.” 1990. https://gazetteer.karnataka.gov.in/info -
2/District+Gazetteer/Bangalore+District+1990+(English)/en.  
• Department, Planning. 2021. “Economic Survey 2021 -22.” 2021. 
https://planning.karnataka.gov.in/info -4/Reports/Economic+Survey+2021 -22/en.  
• Desai, Prathik. 2022. “Karnataka’s EV Policies Need Better Implementation: Chetan 
Maini | Deccan Herald.” 2022. https://www.deccanherald.com/business/business -
news/karnataka -s-ev-policies -need -better -implementation -chetan -maini -
1167040.html.  
• “District Bengaluru Urban, Government of Karnataka | Silicon Valley of India | India.” 
BUD. BUD. https://bengaluruurban.nic.in/en/.  
• “Domestic Electricity LT Tariff Slabs and Rates for All States in India in 2016.” 2017. Bijli 
Bachao. January 16, 2017. https://www.bijlibachao.com/news/domestic -electricity -lt-
tariff -slabs -and-rates -for-all-states -in-india -in.html.  
• Dr. Roopa, K. 2016. “Solid Waste Management in Bangalore City.” 
https://www.ijirt.org/master/publishedpaper/IJIRT151080_PAPER.pdf.  
• Eco-Business. 2022. “India’s Solar Energy Boom Fuels Local Struggle for Green Justice.” 
Eco-Business. February 17, 2022. https://www.eco -business.com/news/indias -solar -
energy -boom -fuels -local -struggle -for-green -justice/.  
• Explainer, Climate. 2022. “Climate Explainer: Nature -Based Solutions.” World Bank. 
2022. https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2022/05/19/what -you-need -to-
know -about -nature -based -solutions -to-climate -change.  
• Explainer, FP. 2022. “Rains Bring Bengaluru to a Halt Again.” 2022. 
https://www.firstpost.com/explainers/cry -me-a-river -why -bengaluru -suffers -from -
flooding -repeatedly -11187091.html.  
• Express, News India. 2022. “Lessons from Bengaluru Pothole Death - The New Indian 
Express.” Bing. 2022. 
https://www.newindianexpress.com/opinions/editorials/2022/mar/18/lessons -from -
bengaluru -pothole -death -2431396.html.  
• FEMP. Energy.gov. “Water -Efficient Technology Opportunity: Distribution System Leak 
Detection.” Energy.Gov. Energy.gov. https://www.energy.gov/femp/water -efficient -
technology -opportunity -distribution -system -leak -detection.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   441  
• “Fifth Assessment Report — IPCC.” 2014. 2014. https://www.ipcc.ch/assessment -
report/ar5/.  
• Fine, Pinchas, and Efrat Hadas. 2012. “Options to Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
during Wastewater Treatment for Agricultural Use.” Science of The Total Environment  
416 (February): 289 –99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2011.11.030.  
• FSI. Chapter -5. “Forest Carbon Stock in States/UTs.” 
https://fsi.nic.in/carbon_stock/chapter -5.pdf.  
• Ganguly, Tanushree, L S Kurinji, and Sarath Guttikunda. 2020. “How Robust Are Urban 
India’s Clean Air Plans?”  
• Gibbs, David, Nancy Harris, and John -Rob Pool. 2022. “Global Protocol for Community -
Scale Greenhouse Gas Inventories: Supplemental Guidance for Forests and Trees,” July. 
https://www.wri.org/research/global -protocol -community -scale -greenhouse -gas-
inventorie s-guidance -forests -trees.  
• Goldman, Michael. 2010. “Speculative Urbanism and the Making of the Next World City | 
Michael Goldman - Academia.Edu.” 2010. 
https://www.academia.edu/20267866/Speculative_Urbanism_and_the_Making_of_the_
Next_World_City.  
• Goswami, Sahana, Samrat Basak, Aakash Malik, and Raj Bhagat Palanichamy. 2022. 
“Urban Blue -Green Conundrum: A 10 -City Study on the Impacts of Urbanization on 
Natural Infrastructure in India,” December. https://www.wri.org/research/urban -blue -
green -conundru m-10-city-study -impacts -urbanization -natural -infrastructure -india.  
• Gouda, KC, Priya Singh, Nikhilasuma P, Mahendra Benke, Reshama Kumari, Geeta 
Agnihotri, Kiran M Hungund, et al. 2020. “Assessment of Air Pollution Status.” 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661 -021 -09177 -w. 
• GPC GHG. 2014. “How the Global Protocol for Community -Scale Greenhouse Gas 
Emission Inventories (GPC) Was Developed | GHG Protocol.” 2014. 
https://ghgprotocol.org/GPC_development_process.  
• “Green Spaces in Bengaluru.” IISC. IISC. 
https://wgbis.ces.iisc.ac.in/energy/water/paper/Green_Space_in_Bengaluru/results.ht
ml. 
• Gujar, Sameer, Amit Deshmukh, and Reshu Gupta. 2022. “Review of Open Space Rules 
and Regulations and Identification of Specificities for Plot -Level Open Spaces to 
Facilitate Sustainable Development: An Indian Case.” In , 1084:012073. 
https://doi.org/10.108 8/1755 -1315/1084/1/012073.  
• Gupta, Saheli Sen. 2015. “Nearly 1.4 Million People Live in Bangalore Slums, Says 
Report.” 2015. https://www.dnaindia.com/bangalore/report -nearly -14-million -people -
live-in-bangalore -slums -says -report -2066294.  
• Hanjagi, Ashok D. 2019. “Land Use Changes in the City Hinterland: A Bengaluru Case 
Study.” In . https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Land -use-changes -in-the-city-
hinterland%3A -A-case -Hanjagi/1ad440fd3c3c3de1fcc9122349f494405717aec3.  
• Hiremath, Shweta, D K Prabhuraj, B. Lakshmikantha, and Surya Chakraborty. 2013. 
“Land Use/Land Cover Change Analysis of Bangalore Urban District and Its Impact on 
Land Surface Temperature.” In . 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/263436423_Land_UseLa nd_Cover_Change_
Analysis_of_Bangalore_Urban_District_and_Its_Impact_on_Land_Surface_Temperature.  
• IBEF. 2019. “Economic Survey 2019 -20 | IBEF.” India Brand Equity Foundation. 2019. 
https://www.ibef.org/economy/economic -survey -2019 -20. 
• ICRA. 2022. “Bangalore Electricity Supply Company Limited: Rating Downgraded to 
[ICRA]BBB+; Outlook Revised to Stable from Negative.” 
https://www.icra.in/Rationale/ShowRationaleReport/?Id=112241.  
• IEA. 2020. “IEA – International Energy Agency.” IEA. 2020. 
https://www.iea.org/reports/energy -technologyperspectives -2020.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   442  
• ——— . 2021. “Roadmap for System Integration of Renewables in India’s RE Rich 
States.” https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/773bd056 -f289 -4c63 -b689 -
8f88fe3e82f9/KarnatakaPSTWorkshopReport.pdf.  
• ——— . 2022. “Methane and Climate Change – Global Methane Tracker.” IEA. 2022. 
https://www.iea.org/reports/global -methane -tracker -2022/methane -and-climate -
change.  
• IIMB. 2020. “Bangalore’s Informal Labour Markets.” 2020. 
https://www.iimb.ac.in/turn_turn/bangalore -informal -labour -markets.php.  
• IMD. 2021. “Annual Lightning Report 2020 -2021: Executive Summary - India 
Meteorological Department (IMD).” July 13, 2021. 
https://public.wmo.int/en/media/news -from -members/annual -lightning -report -2020 -
2021 -executive -summary -india -meteorological.  
• ——— . Heatwaves. “Heat Wave.” 
https://internal.imd.gov.in/section/nhac/dynamic/FAQ_heat_wave.pdf.  
• India, WRI. 2016. “Unlock Bengaluru.” WRI INDIA. 2016. https://wri -
india.org/blog/unlock -bengaluru -five-things -city-needs -get-right.  
• ——— . 2021. “Aqueduct.” World Resources Institute. 2021. 
https://www.wri.org/aqueduct.  
• IPCC. 2006. “Publications - IPCC -TFI.” 2006. https://www.ipcc -
nggip.iges.or.jp/public/2006gl/vol5.html.  
• ——— . 2021. “EFDB - Main Page.” 2021. https://www.ipcc -
nggip.iges.or.jp/EFDB/main.php.  
• ——— . 2022. “Sixth Assessment Report — IPCC.” 2022. 
https://www.ipcc.ch/assessment -report/ar6/.  
• IPCC Guidelines 2006. 2019. “Settlements.” https://www.ipcc -
nggip.iges.or.jp/public/2019rf/pdf/4_Volume4/19R_V4_Ch08_Settlements.pdf.  
• ISD. 2019. “Methods for Measurement of Air Pollution.” 2019. 
https://www.services.bis.gov.in/php/BIS_2.0/bisconnect/standard_review/Standard_r
eview/Isdetails?ID=MTE5NDE%3D.  
• i-Tree. tool. “I -Tree Canopy.” tool. https://canopy.itreetools.org/.  
• Jain, Shreyans. 2020. “Financing Architecture for Green Buildings in India.” ORF. 2020. 
https://www.orfonline.org/expert -speak/financing -architecture -for-green -buildings -
in-india -63650/.  
• Jain, Somya. 2021. “Sustainable Urban Freight Initiative  A Collaborative Approach.”  
• JICA, BWSSB. 2017. “Bengaluru Water Supply and Sewerage Project (Phase -3).” 
https://openjicareport.jica.go.jp/pdf/12300356_01.pdf.  
• Journal, Ijifr. 2016. “ANALYSIS OF LAND USE AND LAND COVER CHANGE OF 
BANGALORE URBAN USING REMOTE SENSING AND GIS TECHNIQUES.” 
https://www.academia.edu/30597402/ANALYSIS_OF_LAND_USE_AND_LAND_COVER_C
HANGE_OF_BANGALORE_URBAN_USING_REMOTE_SENSING_AND_GIS_TECHNIQUES.  
• K, Kavya Shree, and Krishna Raj. 2020. “Benchmarking of Bangalore Water Supply and 
Sewerage Board (BWSSB).” Working Papers , Working Papers, . 
https://ideas.repec.org//p/sch/wpaper/505.html.  
• K, Navya P. 2021. “Bengaluru’s Changing Rainfall Patterns: Expert Points to Climate 
Change.” Citizen Matters, Bengaluru. August 13, 2021. 
https://bengaluru.citizenmatters.in/bengaluru -rainfall -climate -change -ksndmc -study -
65200.  
• Kanuri, Chaitanya, Rohan Rao, and Pawan Mulukutla. WRI India. “A REVIEW OF STATE 
GOVERNMENT POLICIES FOR ELECTRIC MOBILITY.” 
https://www.wricitiesindia.org/sites/default/files/Full_report_EV_State_Policy.pdf.  
• Kaur, Prachi, and Shruti Gupta. 2020. “Examining Urban Local Governance in India 
through the Case of Bengaluru.” PRS Legislative Research. 2020. 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   443  
https://prsindia.org/theprsblog/examining -urban -local -governance -in-india -through -
the-case -of-bengalurua.  
• Kelly, Cassey, and Yuanrong Zhou. 2022. “Hydrogen Fuel for Transport in India - 
International Council on Clean Transportation.” 2022. 
https://theicct.org/publication/india -fuel-hydrogen -cost -jan22/.  
• KG, Raj, Trivedi S, and Ramesh KS. 2021. “Assessment of Vegetation Cover of Bengaluru 
City, India, Using Geospatial Techniques | SpringerLink.” 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661 -021 -09177 -w. 
• Khanna, Bosky. 2022. “Bengaluru Roads Designed Only for  Vehicles, Not Pedestrians: 
Experts - The New Indian Express.” 2022. 
https://www.newindianexpress.com/cities/bengaluru/2022/mar/22/bengaluru -
roads -designed -only -forvehicles -not-pedestrians -experts -2432732.html.  
• Knowledge hub, C40 Cities. 21AD. “Climate Budgets: Why Your City Needs One.” 21AD. 
https://www.c40knowledgehub.org/s/article/Climate -budgets -why -your -city-needs -
one?language=en_US.  
• KSDB. 2011. “Statement Showing the Details of Declared Slum in Bangalore City 
(Bangalore Urban).”  
• KSNDMC. 2022. “KARNATAKA STATE  THUNDERSTORM AND LIGHTNING ACTION PLAN 
- 2022.” 2022. https://ksndmc.org/kn/ViewPdf?pdfdoc=LIGHTNING -
ACTION%20PLAN -2022.  
• Kulkarni, Chiranjeevi. 2019. “Bengaluru Closes in on Delhi, Has 80 Lakh Vehicles  | 
Deccan Herald.” 2019. https://www.deccanherald.com/city/top -bengaluru -
stories/bengaluru -closes -in-on-delhi -has-80-lakh -vehicles -726305.html.  
• Kumari, Kanchan, Sunil Kumar, Vineel Rajagopal, Ankur Khare, and Rakesh Kumar. 
2019. “Emission from Open Burning of Municipal Solid Waste in India.” Environmental 
Technology  40 (17): 2201 –14. https://doi.org/10.1080/09593330.2017.1351489.  
• Leung, Dennis Y. C. 2015. “Frontiers | Outdoor -Indoor Air Pollution in Urban 
Environment: Challenges and Opportunity.” 2015. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fenvs.2014.00069/full.  
• M, Akshatha. 2015. “How Is Bengaluru Supposed to Handle Disasters like Floods?” 
Citizen Matters, Bengaluru. December 16, 2015. 
https://bengaluru.citizenmatters.in/disaster -management -in-bangalore -flood -
emergency -helpline -7956.  
• M. Rao, Mohit. 2020. “Katte and Kunte: The Lesser Known Water Bodies of Bengaluru.” 
2020. https://india.mongabay.com/2020/10/the -lesser -known -waterbodies -of-
bengaluru/.  
• Manasi, S, Hema Nagaraj, Channamma Kambara, N Latha, O K Remadevi, and K H 
Vinaykumar. 2021. “Promoting Green Buildings towards Achieving Sustainable 
Development Goals: A Review.”  
• Mathew, Christin. 2021. “Despite Growth of Electric Vehicles, Karnataka Lags in 
Subsidising Consumers.” The Times of India , December 12, 2021. 
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/bengaluru/despite -growth -of-evs-karnataka -
lags -in-subsidising -consumers/articleshow/88232015.cms.  
• Matters, Citizen. 2 020. “Series: Bengaluru’s Ecosystems and Biodiversity Archives.” 
Citizen Matters, Bengaluru. 2020. 
https://bengaluru.citizenmatters.in/section/bengaluru -ecosystems -and-biodiversity.  
• Menon, Aarthi. 2022. “Karnataka’s Biggest Solar Park.” 2022. https://article -
14.com/post/in -karnataka -s-biggest -solar -park -as-land -livelihoods -lost-a-warning -to-
india -s-solar -dreams --623beadc840de.  
• MoEFCC. 2019. “NCAP.” https://moef.gov.in/wp -
content/uploads/2019/05/NCAP_Report.pdf.  
• MSME. 2016. “District Industrial Profile, MSME.” 
https://msmedibangalore.gov.in/files/Bengaluru%20Urban.pdf.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   444  
• Muller, Nicholas Z., Christopher W. Tessum, Jason D. Hill, Julian D. Marshall, Peter J. 
Adams, Elisebeth A Gilmore, and Jinhyok Heo. 2017. “Developing Estimates of the Social 
Costs of Air Pollutants and Their Uncertainty Using  Reduced Complexity Models (RCM).” 
https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/wp -content/uploads/sites/1273/2019/09/Gilmore -
Heo -Muller -Tessum -Hill-Marshall -Adams -2019.pdf.  
• Mundoli, Seema, Harini Nagendra, and Azim Premji. 2018. “Lakes of Bengaluru: The 
Once Living, But Now Endangered Peri -Urban Commons,” March.  
• N, Shree D. 2019. “Namma Metro: Trees Axed in Whitefield, Compensatory Planting in 
Uttara Kannada. Here’s Why.” Citizen Matters, Bengaluru. April 1, 2019. 
https://bengaluru.citizenmatters.in/metro -trees -axed -whitefield -compensatory -
planting -uttara -kannada -why -33974.  
• Nations, United. 2018. “World Urbanization Prospects - Population Division - United 
Nations.” 2018. https://population.un.org/wup/.  
• Naveen, Dr. BP, and Sivapullaiah Puvvadi. 2020. “Solid Waste Management: Current 
Scenario and Challenges in Bengaluru.” In , 1 –23. 
https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.90837.  
• NIUA. 2021. “Cities_Readiness_Report.” https://www.niua.org/c -cube/e -
reports/assets/images/Cities_Readiness_Report_Chapter_4.pdf.  
• OECD. 2009. “Guidelines for Project and  Programme Evaluations.” 
https://www.oecd.org/development/evaluation/dcdndep/47069197.pdf?_ga=2.12806
7212.1467609223.1687350996 -883989966.1687350996.  
• Opencity. 2015. “BDA Revised Master Plan.” 2015. 
https://data.opencity.in/dataset/bda -revised -master -plan -2015.  
• ——— . 2020. “BDA Revised Master Plan.” 2020. https://data.opencity.in/dataset/bda -
revised -master -plan -2031.  
• ——— . 2023. “BBMP Budget 23 -24.” 2023. https://opencity.in/.  
• “Overview.” 2017. 2017. https://geos -chem.seas.harvard.edu/geos -overview.  
• Palanichamy, Raj Bhagat. 2022. “Overpopulation, Concrete Jungle, Altered Landscape: 
Decoding Bengaluru’s Urban Flood Woes.” India Today. 2022. 
https://www.indiatoday.in/news -analysis/story/decoding -the-causes -behind -
bengaluru -flooding -woes -1997488 -2022 -09-07. 
• Patel, Shikha, Raffaello Furlan, and Michael Grosvald,. 2021. “A Framework for 
Enhancing the Spatial Urban Form of Informal Economies in India: The Case of Krishna 
Rajendra Market, Bangalore.” 2021. 
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/21582440211 023184.  
• Phillip, Christin Mathew. 2021. “Despite Growth Of EVs, Karnataka Lags In Subsidising 
Consumers | Bengaluru News - Times of India.” 2021 . 
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/bengaluru/despite -growth -of-evs-karnataka -
lags -in-subsidising -consumers/articleshow/88232015.cms.  
• PPAC. 2020. “Ready Reckoner Oil Industry Information at a Glance (Vol. 11, Issue 01).”  
• PRANA. 2019. “Portal for Regulation of Air Pollution in Non -Attainment Cities.” 2019. 
https://prana.cpcb.gov.in/#/clean -air-
city/dashboard/eyJzdGF0ZSI6Ikthcm5hdGFrYSIsImNpdHkiOiJCYW5nYWxvcmUiLCJyb3
V0ZXJMaW5rIjoiL2NsZWFuLWFpci1jaXR5L2xpc3QifQ%3D%3D.  
• R, Sneha. 2022. “No Fresh Rains, but Many Subways Remain Flooded in Bengaluru.” 
Deccan Herald. October 23, 2022. https://www.deccanherald.com/city/top -bengaluru -
stories/no -fresh -rains -but-many -subways -remain -flooded -in-bengaluru -1156030.html.  
• Rabo, Olga. 2020. “What Is CO2e and How Is It Calculated?” 2020. 
https://www.coolerfuture.com/blog/co2e.  
• Raju, K. V., A. Ravindra, S. Manasi, K. C. Smitha, and Ravindra Srinivas. 2018. “Trends and 
Status of Environmental Resource Use in Bengaluru Metropolitan Area (BMA).” In Urban 
Environmental Governance in India: Browsing Bengaluru , edited by K.V. Raju, A. 
Ravindra, S. Manasi, K.C. Smitha, and Ravindra Srinivas, 109 –247. The Urban Book 
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   445  
Series. Cham: Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-319 -
73468 -2_6.  
• Ram, Theja. 2018. “Will Bengaluru Run out of Water and Is It Too Late to Save the City? | 
The News Minute.” 2018. https://www.thenewsminute.com/article/will -bengaluru -
run-out-water -and-it-too-late-save -city-76455.  
• ——— . 2019. “Bengaluru Has over 300 Km of Bad Roads, Will BBMP Fix It before the 
Monsoon? | The News Minute.” 2019. 
https://www.thenewsminute.com/article/bengaluru -has-over -300 -km-bad-roads -will-
bbmp -fix-it-monsoon -100909.  
• Ramachandra, T V, Asulabha K. S., Sincy Varghese, Vinay Shivamurthy, Dr. Bharath 
Aithal, Sudarshan Bhat, and Durga Mahapatra. 2015. PATHETIC STATUS OF WETLANDS 
IN BANGALORE: EPITOME OF INEFFICIENT AND UNCOORDINATED GOVERNANCE . 
https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.1.1092.7846.  
• Ramachandra, T. V. and Shwetmala. 2009. “Emissions from India’s Transport Sector: 
Statewise Synthesis.” Atmospheric Environment  43 (34): 5510 –17. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2009.07.015.  
• Ramachandra, TV. 2017. “Stormwater Floods.” 2017. 
https://www.scribd.com/document/639586385/IISc -TVR -ETR123 -Stormwater -
Floods -RG. 
• Ramya, Vrushal Pendharkar, Priyanka Jamwal, Daniel Phillips. 2022. “A New Approach 
to Decontaminating Bengaluru’s Wastewater.” Citizen Matters, Bengaluru. January 28, 
2022. https://bengaluru.citizenmatters.in/new -approach -to-decontaminate -bengaluru -
wastewa ter-sewage -73144.  
• Rao, Mohit M. 2020. “Unchecked Tree Loss Is Wiping out the Slender Loris from 
Bengaluru.” Citizen Matters, Bengaluru. September 24, 2020. 
https://bengaluru.citizenmatters.in/slender -loris -bengaluru -habitat -canopy -loss -
survival -iisc-52478.  
• Ravi, Pragathi. 2022. “Disaster Management in Bengaluru: Temporary Fixes Touted as 
Solutions as City Floods Again.” Citizen Matters, Bengaluru. September 15, 2022. 
https://bengaluru.citizenmatters.in/disaster -management -plan -in-bengaluru -88859.  
• Reddy, Jahnavi. 2018. “Bengaluru’s Waste Management Crisis.” 2018. 
https://www.thenewsminute.com/article/bengaluru -s-waste -management -crisis -
options -run-out-bbmps -plans -remain -unclear -79600.  
• Regy, Prasanth, Rakesh Sarwal, Clay Stranger, Garrett Fitzgerald, Jagabanta 
Ningthoujam, Arjun Gupta, and Nuvodita Singh. 2021. Turning Around the Power 
Distribution Sector: Learnings and Best Practices from Reforms . 
https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/xd2he.  
• Reliefweb. 2023. “2022: A Year When Disasters Compounded and Cascaded - World | 
ReliefWeb.” January 4, 2023. https://reliefweb.int/report/world/2022 -year -when -
disasters -compounded -and-cascaded.  
• Reporter, Staff. 2020. “300 Trucks Stuck at Mittaganahalli Quarry Unable to Unload 
Garbage.” The Hindu , January 9, 2020, sec. Bengaluru. 
https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/bangalore/300 -trucks -stuck -at-
mittaganahalli -quarry -unable -to-unload -garbage/article30525013.ece.  
• ——— . 2022. “Bengaluru Rains | Power Station Waterlogged in Kadubeesanahalli.” The 
Hindu , September 5, 2022, sec. Karnataka. 
https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka/bengaluru -rains -power -station -
waterlogged -in-kadubeesanahalli/article65852757.ece.  
• Review, World Population. 2023. “Bangalore Population 2023.” 2023. 
https://worldpopulationreview.com/world -cities/bangalore -population.  
• Salvador. 2019. “Salvador CAP 2049.” 
https://cdn.locomotive.works/sites/5ab410c8a2f42204838f797e/content_entry5c8ab
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   446  
5851647e100801756a3/60abe3e2795a8b00a674dd75/files/PMAMC_Ebook_ingles.pdf
?1621877739.  
• Samant, Tapaswini Mohapatra. 2017. “Floor Space Index to Get a Re -Look More Open 
Space, Better Infrastructure, Future of Indian Cities” 6 (2).  
• Service, Express News. 2022. “Floods Caused Rs 225 Crore Loss: Outer Ring Road 
Companies Associations.” The Indian Express  (blog). September 2, 2022. 
https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/bangalore/floods -caused -rs-225 -crore -loss-
outer -ring -road -companies -associations -8126614/.  
• Shridharan, Bhanu. 2021. “Biodiversity in Bengaluru.” 
https://images.citizenmatters.in/wp -
content/uploads/sites/14/2021/09/24044308/Reporters -Manual -Bengaluru -
Biodiversity_Final -1.pdf.  
• Singh, Prasoon. TERI. “Trend in Land Use Land Cover  Changes in Bangalore.” 
https://www.teriin.org/projects/apn_capable/pdf/bang_present/Prasoon_Singh.pdf.  
• Sitharaman, Nirmala. 2023. “Union Budget 23 -24.” 
https://www.indiabudget.gov.in/doc/budget_speech.pdf.  
• Staff, DTE. 2022. “Too Short, Too Far: A Year of Disasters.” 2022. 
https://www.downtoearth.org.in/news/natural -disasters/2022 -too-short -too-far-a-
year -of-disasters -86915.  
• Strafford Regional Planning Commission. 2018. “SRPC Annual Report.” 2018. 
https://strafford.org/docs/srpc -annual -report -fy-2018/.  
• Subhashini, Bhagya. 2023. “BSWML Floats 79 Tenders - 243 City Wards.” 2023. 
https://swarajyamag.com/news -brief/bengaluru -bswml -re-floats -tenders -to-
streamline -waste -management -in-all-243 -wards.  
• Sudhakar, Meera, Pooja Vijay Ramamurthi, and Radhika Sharma. 2014. “RE -Energising 
Karnataka: An Assessment of Renewable Energy Policies, Challenges and Opportunities.”  
• “SUTP Module 5e - Urban Transport and Climate Change - SUTP.” GIZ. GIZ. 
https://sutp.org/publications/the -role -of-transport -in-urban -development -policy -2/. 
• Tarei, Pradeep Kumar, Pushpendu Chand, and Himanshu Gupta. 2021. “Barriers to the 
Adoption of Electric Vehicles: Evidence from India.” Journal of Cleaner Production  291 
(April): 125847. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.125847.  
• TERI. 2020. “What Would Make Indians Buy EVs? Our Survey Has Some Answers.” 2020. 
https://www.teriin.org/blog/what -would -make -indians -buy-evs-our-survey -has-some -
answers.  
• Thakrar, Sumil K., S. Apte, Dylan B. Millet, Spyros N. Marshall, Jason D. Hill, Christopher 
W. Tessum, and Srinidhi Balasubramanian. InMAP. “Global, High -Resolution, Reduced -
Complexity Air Quality Modeling for PM2.5 Using  InMAP (Intervention Model for Air 
Pollution).” https://chemrxiv.org/engage/api -
gateway/chemrxiv/assets/orp/resource/item/6212a8857d068aa1a326e062/original/
global -high -resolution -reduced -complexity -air-quality -modeling -for-pm2 -5-using -in-
map -intervention -model-for-air-pollution.pdf.  
• “The Devastating Loss of Another 60,000 Trees.” 2021. Deccan Herald. July 11, 2021. 
https://www.deccanherald.com/opinion/the -devastating -loss -of-another -60000 -trees -
1007240.html.  
• The New Indian Express. 2017. “Bengaluru’s Only Hope: Revive the 1,000 Lakes 
Kempegowda Built, Stop Depending on Cauvery.” 2017. 
https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/karnataka/2017/may/07/bengalurus -
only -hope -revive -the-1000 -lakes -kempegowda -built -stop -depending -on-cauvery -
1602046.html.  
• Times  Now. 2022.  “Water Treatment Plant Shutdown In Bengaluru Due To 
Waterlogging.” 2022. https://www.timesnownews.com/videos/mirror -
now/society/water -treatment -plant -shutdown -in-bengaluru -due-to-waterlogging -
latest -news -english -news -video -94008079.  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   447  
• TNPCB. 2021. “ACTION PLAN FOR CONTROL OF AIR  POLLUTION IN MILLION PLUS 
CITY OF  TAMILNADU (Revised) CHENNAI U. A.” 
https://chennaicorporation.gov.in/gcc/images/Chennai%20U%20A%20%20City%20A
ction%20plan.pdf.  
• TOI. 2018. “Study Reveals 2,000 Slums in Bengaluru, Govt Lists Only 597.” 2018. 
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/bengaluru/study -reveals -2000 -slums -in-
bengaluru -govt -lists -only -597/articleshow/65096665.cms.  
• UN. 2015. “The Paris Agreement | United Nations.” 2015. 
https://www.un.org/en/climatechange/paris -agreement.  
• UN Climate change. 2019. “The Paris Agreement | UNFCCC.” 2019. 
https://unfccc.int/process -and-meetings/the -paris -agreement.  
• UNEP. 2017. “Cities and Climate Change.” UNEP - UN Environment Programme. 
September 26, 2017. http://www.unep.org/explore -topics/resource -efficiency/what -
we-do/cities/cities -and-climate -change.  
• UNFCCC. 2022a. “India Updated First Nationally Determined Contribution | UNFCCC.” 
2022. https://unfccc.int/documents/611411.  
• ——— . 2022b. “India’s Long -Term Low -Carbon Development Strategy | UNFCCC.” 2022. 
https://unfccc.int/documents/623511.  
• Upadhyaya, Himanshu. 2019. “CAG Report Shows How Karnataka’s Solid Waste 
Management Is in Disarray.” 2019. https://www.downtoearth.org.in/news/waste/cag -
report -shows -how -karnataka -s-solid -waste -management -is-in-disarray -62638.  
• Vajjarapu, Harsha, Ashish Verma, and Hemanthini Allirani. 2020. “Evaluating Climate 
Change Adaptation Policies for Urban Transportation in India.” International Journal of 
Disaster Risk Reduction  47 (August): 101528. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2020.101528.  
• Varshney, Apekshita. 2020. “Body to Protect Bengaluru’s Biodiversity Revived, but Can 
It Help?” Citizen Matters, Bengaluru. September 15, 2020. 
https://bengaluru.citizenmatters.in/bengaluru -bbmp -biodiversity -management -
committee -bmc -pbr-conservation -trees -animals -51714.  
• Vasudevan, Vinod, Ruchika Agarwala, and Sarojeet Dash. 2021. “Is Vehicle Ownership in 
Urban India Influenced by the Availability of High Quality Dedicated Public Transit 
Systems?” IATSS Research  45 (3): 286 –92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iatssr.2020.12.005.  
• Verma, Vajjarapu, Hemanthini. 2018. “Sustainable Transport Measures for Liveable 
Bengaluru.” 
http://civil.iisc.ac.in/~ashishv/beta/banner/c851211e182a5c6a78144f642178a3a818.
pdf. 
• Viswanathan, Brinda, and K S Kavi Kumar. 2015. “Weather, Agriculture and Rural 
Migration: Evidence from State and District Level Migration in India | Environment and 
Development Economics | Cambridge Core.” 2015. 
https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/env ironment -and-development -
economics/article/abs/weather -agriculture -and-rural -migration -evidence -from -state -
and-district -level -migration -in-india/1C50FEC3CB13B9ECA749FEF4BEC39911.  
• Y Maheswara Reddy. 2020. “There Is a Wet Garbage Crisis Looming in Bengaluru.” 
Bangalore Mirror. 2020. 
https://bangaloremirror.indiatimes.com/bangalore/civic/video -there -is-a-wet-
garbage -crisis -looming -in-bengaluru/articleshow/78943045.cms.  
 
 
  
 
BENGALURU CLIMATE ACTION AND RESILIENCE PLAN   |   448  
 

===== END FILE: BCAP_FullReport_091224.pdf =====

===== START FILE: Bengaluru-BDA-RMP-2031-Volume_4_PlanningDistrictReport.pdf =====
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
i 
TABLE OF CONTENT 
 
1. PLANNING DISTRICTS FOR RMP 2031 ..................................................................................................  1-1 
1.1 BACKGROUND  ..................................................................................................................................  1-1 
1.2 THE NEED ........................................................................................................................................  1-1 
1.3 THE DELINEATION AND PLANNING DISTRICTS OF RMP  2031  ....................................................................  1-2 
2. PD 1: CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT ......................................................................................................  2-1 
3. PD 02: INDIRANAGAR - KAGADASAPURA ............................................................................................  3-1 
4. PD 03: AUSTIN TOWN-KORAMANGALA-HSR LAYOUT ..........................................................................  4-1 
5. PD 04: JAYANAGARA ...........................................................................................................................  5-1 
6. PD 05: RAJAJI NAGAR –BAPUJI NAGAR –AZAD NAGAR ..........................................................................  6-1 
7. PD 06: YESHWANTPUR – MALLESWARAM ...........................................................................................  7-1 
8. PD 07: RT NAGAR - HEBBAL-GKVK .......................................................................................................  8-1 
9. PD 08: THANISANDRA-NAGAWARA-RICHARDS TOWN ........................................................................  9-1 
10. PD 09: BANSAWADI – HORAMAVU ..................................................................................................  10-1 
11. PD 10: KR PURAM - HOODI ..............................................................................................................  11-1 
12. PD 11: DODDA NEKKUND I – WHITEFIELD .........................................................................................  12-1 
13. PD 12: BELANDURU - HARALURU .....................................................................................................  13-1 
14. PD 13: PARAPPANA AGRAHARA – HULIMAVU .................................................................................  14-1 
15. PD 14: BANASHANKARI – BTM - MADIVALA ....................................................................................  15-1 
16. PD 15: KATHRIGUPPE .......................................................................................................................  16-1 
17. PD 16: GOTTIGERE – ANJANAPURA ..................................................................................................  17-1 
18. PD 17: NAYANADAHALLI ..................................................................................................................  18-1 
19. PD 18: PEENYA - NAGARBHAVI ........................................................................................................  19-1 
20. PD 19- JALAHALLI – JARAKABANDEKAVAL .......................................................................................  20-1 
21. PD 20: YELAHANKA ..........................................................................................................................  21-1 
22. PD 21: MARENAHALLI – KANNUR ....................................................................................................  22-1 
23. PD 22: BIDARAHALLI ........................................................................................................................  23-1 
24. PD 23: CHEEMASANDRA SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT ZONE ..................................................................  24-1 
25. PD 24: VARTHUR – GUNJUR .............................................................................................................  25-1 
26. PD 25: HALANAYAKANAHALLI – KODATHI SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT ZONE ........................................  26-1 
27. PD 26: DOMMASANDRA SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT ZONE ..................................................................  27-1 
28. PD 27: SINGASANDRA –HEBBAGODI –KOMMASANDRA ....................................................................  28-1 
29. PD 28: ELECTRONIC CI TY – DODDATHOGURU ..................................................................................  29-1 
30. PD 29: HULIMANGALA .....................................................................................................................  30-1 
31. PD 30: BANNERUGHATTA ................................................................................................................  31-1 
32.  PD 31: AGARA ................................................................................................................................ . 32-1 
33. PD 32: ULLALU – KENGERI ................................................................................................................  33-1 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
ii 
34. PD 33: HEROHALLI ...........................................................................................................................  34-1 
35. PD 34: CHIKKABANWARA ................................................................................................................  35-1 
36. PD 35: BETTAHALASURU -HUNASAMARANAHALLI SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT ZO NE ..........................  36-1 
37. PD 36: KUMBALGODU SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT ZO NE ......................................................................  37-1 
38. PD 37: DODDA ALADA MARA ...........................................................................................................  38-9 
39. PD 38: SULIKERI - BHEEMANAKUPPE ...............................................................................................  39-1 
40. PD 39: SHEEGEHALLI – YELACHAGUPPE ...........................................................................................  40-1 
41. PD 40: MAKALI – MACHOHALLI ........................................................................................................  41-1 
42. PD 41: ALURU ..................................................................................................................................  42-1 
43. PD 42: RAJANAKUNTE ......................................................................................................................  43-1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
iii 
List of Tables 
 
Table 1-1: Parameters for Delineation of PD boundaries. .............................................................  1-3 
Table 1-2: Planning Districts of RMP 2031 .....................................................................................  1-5 
Table 2-1: PD 01 Existing Land Use Area Statement ......................................................................  2-3 
Table 2-2: PD 01 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...................................................................  2-5 
Table 3-1: PD 02 Existing Land Use Area Statement ......................................................................  3-3 
Table 3-2: PD 02 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...................................................................  3-6 
Table 4-1: PD 03 Existing Land Use Area Statement ......................................................................  4-3 
Table 4-2: PD 03 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...................................................................  4-6 
Table 5-1: PD 04 Existing Land Use Area Statement ......................................................................  5-3 
Table 5-2: PD 04 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...................................................................  5-6 
Table 6-1: PD 05 Existing Land Use Area Statement ......................................................................  6-3 
Table 6-2: PD 05 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...................................................................  6-6 
Table 7-1: PD 06 Existing Land Use Area Statement ......................................................................  7-2 
Table 7-2: PD 06 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...................................................................  7-6 
Table 8-1: PD 07 Existing Land Use Area Statement ......................................................................  8-4 
Table 8-2: PD 07 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...................................................................  8-7 
Table 9-1: PD 08 Existing Land Use Area Statement ......................................................................  9-2 
Table 9-2: PD 08 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...................................................................  9-7 
Table 10-1: PD 09 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  10-3 
Table 10-2: PD 09 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  10-6 
Table 11-1: PD 10 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  11-3 
Table 11-2: PD 10 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  11-6 
Table 12-1: PD 11 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  12-3 
Table 12-2: PD 10 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  12-6 
Table 13-1: PD 12 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  13-4 
Table 13-2: PD 12 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  13-7 
Table 14-1: PD 13 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  14-3 
Table 14-2: PD 13 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  14-6 
Table 15-1: PD 14 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  15-3 
Table 15-2: PD 14 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  15-6 
Table 16-1: PD 15 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  16-3 
Table 16-2: PD 15 Proposed Land Use Area Stetement ...............................................................  16-5 
Table 17-1: PD 16 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  17-3 
Table 17-2: PD 16 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  17-6 
Table 18-1: PD 17 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  18-3 
Table 18-2: PD 17 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  18-6 
Table 19-1: PD 18 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  19-4 
Table 19-2: PD 18 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  19-7 
Table 20-1: PD 19 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  20-3 
Table 20-2: PD 19 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  20-5 
Table 21-1: PD 20 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  21-3 
Table 21-2: PD 20 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  21-4 
Table 22-1: PD 21 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  22-3 
Table 22-2: PD 21 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  22-4 
Table 23-1: PD 22 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  23-2 
Table 23-2: PD 22 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  23-4 
Table 24-1: PD 23 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  24-3 
Table 24-2: PD 23 Propsed Land Use Area Statement ................................................................ . 24-5 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
iv 
Table 25-1: PD 24 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  25-3 
Table 25-2: PD 24 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  25-6 
Table 26-1: PD 25 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  26-2 
Table 26-2: PD 25 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  26-4 
Table 27-1: PD 26 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  27-3 
Table 27-2: PD 26 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  27-5 
Table 28-1: PD 27 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  28-2 
Table 28-2: PD 27 Proposed Landuse Area Statement ................................................................  28-4 
Table 29-1: PD 28 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  29-3 
Table 29-2: PD 28 Proposed Landuse Area Statement ................................................................  29-5 
Table 30-1: PD 29 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  30-2 
Table 30-2: PD 29 Proposed Landuse Area Statement ................................................................  30-4 
Table 31-1: PD 30 Villages within LPA of BDA with BNP ..............................................................  31-3 
Table 31-2: PD 30 Villages of LPA of BDA falling within ESZ of BNP .............................................  31-3 
Table 31-3: PD 30 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  31-5 
Table 31-4: PD 30 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  31-8 
Table 32-1: PD 31 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  32-2 
Table 32-2: PD 31 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  32-4 
Table 33-1: PD 32 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  33-3 
Table 33-2: PD 32 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  33-6 
Table 34-1: PD 33 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  34-3 
Table 34-2: Proposed Land Use Area Statement .........................................................................  34-6 
Table 35-1: PD 34 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  35-3 
Table 35-2: PD 34 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  35-4 
Table 36-1: PD 35 Existing Land Use Statement ...........................................................................  36-2 
Table 36-2: PD 35 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  36-4 
Table 37-1: PD 36 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  37-3 
Table 37-2: PD 36 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  37-5 
Table 38-1: PD 37 Existing Land Use Area Statement ................................................................  38-11 
Table 38-2: PD 37 Proposed Land Use Area Statement .............................................................  38-13 
Table 39-1: PD 38 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  39-3 
Table 39-2: PD 38 Proposed Land Use Area Stateme nt ...............................................................  39-1 
Table 40-1: PD 39 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  40-3 
Table 40-2: PD 39 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  40-5 
Table 41-1: PD 40 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  41-3 
Table 41-2: PD 40 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  41-5 
Table 42-1: PD 41 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  42-4 
Table 42-2: PD 41 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  42-6 
Table 43-1: PD 42 Existing Land Use Area Statement ..................................................................  43-3 
Table 43-2: PD 42 Proposed Land Use Area Statement ...............................................................  43-5 
 
 
 
  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
v 
List of Figures 
 
Figure 1-1: Planning Districts of RMP 2031 ....................................................................................  1-4 
Figure 2-1: PD 1 Existing Land Use Map .........................................................................................  2-2 
Figure 2-2: PD 1 Proposed Land Use Map ......................................................................................  2-5 
Figure 2-3: PD 1 Central Administrative Heritage Zone ................................................................ . 2-7 
Figure 2-4: PD 1 Pette Heritage Zone .............................................................................................  2-8 
Figure 2-5: PD 1 MG Road Heritage Zone ......................................................................................  2-8 
Figure 2-6: PD 1 Shivajinagar Heritage Zone ..................................................................................  2-9 
Figure 2-7: PD 1 Cleveland Town Heritage Zone ............................................................................  2-9 
Figure 2-8: PD 1 Ulsoor Heritage Zone .........................................................................................  2-10 
Figure 3-1: PD 2 Existing Land Use M ap .........................................................................................  3-2 
Figure 3-2: PD 2 Proposed Land Use Map ......................................................................................  3-5 
Figure 3-3: PD 2 Proposed Road Connection DRDO to ORR ..........................................................  3-7 
Figure 3-4: PD 2 Proposed ROB for Connecting Kaggadasapura Main Road ................................ . 3-8 
Figure 3-5: PD 2 Proposed Road at NGEF junction .........................................................................  3-8 
Figure 3-6: PD 2 Proposed Redevelopment of Dadda Banasawadi Flyover ...................................  3-8 
Figure 4-1: PD 3 Existing Land Use Map .........................................................................................  4-2 
Figure 4-2: PD 3 Proposed Land Use Map ......................................................................................  4-5 
Figure 5-1: PD 4 Existing Land Use Map .........................................................................................  5-2 
Figure 5-2: PD 4 Proposed Land Use Map ......................................................................................  5-5 
Figure 5-3: PD 4 Gavipuram, Basavangudi and VV Puram Heritage Zone ......................................  5-7 
Figure 6-1: PD 5 Existing Land Use Map .........................................................................................  6-2 
Figure 6-2: PD 5 Proposed Land Use Map ......................................................................................  6-5 
Figure 6-3: PD 5 Extent of Pete Heritage Zone ...............................................................................  6-8 
Figure 7-1: PD 6 Existing Land Use Map .........................................................................................  7-3 
Figure 7-2: PD 6 Proposed Land Use Map ......................................................................................  7-6 
Figure 7-3: PD 6 Proposed Malleshwaram Heritage Zone .............................................................  7-7 
Figure 7-4: PD 6: Proposed CV Raman House Heritage Zone .........................................................  7-7 
Figure 7-5: PD 6 Bangalore Palace Heritage Zone ..........................................................................  7-8 
Figure 8-1: PD 7 Existing Land Use Map .........................................................................................  8-3 
Figure 8-2: PD 7 Proposed Land Use Map ......................................................................................  8-6 
Figure 9-1: PD 8 Existing Land Use Map .........................................................................................  9-3 
Figure 9-2: PD 08 Proposed Land Use Map ....................................................................................  9-6 
Figure 9-3: PD 8 New Road Link .....................................................................................................  9-8 
Figure 9-4: PD 8 Richards Town Heritage Zone ............................................................................  9-10 
Figure 10-1: PD 09 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  10-2 
Figure 10-2 PD 09 Proposed Land Use Map .................................................................................  10-5 
Figure 11-1: PD 10 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  11-2 
Figure 11-2: PD 10 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  11-5 
Figure 11-3: PD 10 New Link Ramamurthy Nagar Main Road to ITPL Main Road .......................  11-7 
Figure 12-1: PD 11 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  12-2 
Figure 12-2: PD 11 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  12-5 
Figure 12-3: PD 11 Whitefield Inner Circle Heritage Zone ...........................................................  12-8 
Figure 13-1: PD 12 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  13-3 
Figure 13-2: PD 12 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  13-6 
Figure 13-3: PD 12 Local Area Circulation Network Improvement Plan for ORR Zone ................  13-8 
Figure 14-1: PD 13 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  14-2 
Figure 14-2: PD 13 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  14-5 
Figure 14-3: PD 13: Proposed Begur Temple Heritage Zone ........................................................  14-8 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
vi 
Figure 15-1: PD 14 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  15-3 
Figure 15-2: PD 14 Proposed Land Map .......................................................................................  15-6 
Figure 16-1: PD 15 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  16-2 
Figure 16-2: PD 15 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  16-5 
Figure 17-1: PD 16 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  17-2 
Figure 17-2: PD 16 Proposed Land Map .......................................................................................  17-5 
Figure 18-1: PD 17 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  18-2 
Figure 18-2: PD 17 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  18-5 
Figure 19-1: PD 18 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  19-3 
Figure 19-2: PD 18 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  19-6 
Figure 20-1: PD 19 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  20-2 
Figure 20-2: PD 19 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  20-4 
Figure 21-1: PD 20 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  21-2 
Figure 21-2: PD 20 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  21-4 
Figure 22-1: PD 21 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  22-2 
Figure 22-2: PD 21 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  22-4 
Figure 23-1: PD 22 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  23-2 
Figure 23-2: PD 22 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  23-4 
Figure 24-1: PD 23 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  24-2 
Figure 24-2: PD 23 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  24-4 
Figure 25-1: PD 24 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  25-2 
Figure 25-2: PD 24 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  25-5 
Figure 26-1: PD 25 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  26-2 
Figure 26-2: PD 25 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  26-4 
Figure 27-1: PD 26 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  27-2 
Figure 27-2: PD 26 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  27-4 
Figure 28-1: PD 27 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  28-2 
Figure 28-2: PD 27 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  28-4 
Figure 29-1: PD 28 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  29-2 
Figure 29-2: PD 28 Proposed Landuse Map .................................................................................  29-5 
Figure 30-1: PD 29 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  30-2 
Figure 30-2 PD 29 Proposed Land Use Map .................................................................................  30-4 
Figure 31-1: PD 30 Map Showing GPS Points of Bannerghatta Wild Life Rang e, Bannerghatta 
National Park on Cadastral Village Map .......................................................................................  31-2 
Figure 31-2: PD 30 Extent of Eco-Sensitive Zone of Bannerughatta National Park on ELU .........  31-4 
Figure 31-3: PD 30 Extent of Eco-Sensitive Zone of Bannerughatta National Park on Village Map
 ......................................................................................................................................................  31-4 
Figure 31-4: PD 30 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  31-6 
Figure 31-5: PD 30 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  31-7 
Figure 32-1: PD 31 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  32-2 
Figure 32-2: PD 31 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  32-3 
Figure 33-1: PD 32 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  33-2 
Figure 33-2: PD 32 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  33-5 
Figure 34-1: PD 33 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  34-2 
Figure 34-2: PD 33 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  34-5 
Figure 35-1: PD 34 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  35-2 
Figure 35-2: PD 34 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  35-4 
Figure 36-1: PD 35 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  36-2 
Figure 36-2: PD 35 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  36-4 
Figure 37-1: PD 36 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  37-3 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
vii 
Figure 37-2: PD 36 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  37-5 
Figure 38-1: PD 37 Existing Land Use Map .................................................................................  38-10 
Figure 38-2: PD 37 Proposed Land Use Map ..............................................................................  38-12 
Figure 39-1: PD 38 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  39-2 
Figure 39-2: PD 38 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  39-4 
Figure 40-1: PD 39 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  40-2 
Figure 40-2: PD 39 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  40-4 
Figure 41-1: PD 40 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  41-2 
Figure 41-2: PD 40 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  41-4 
Figure 42-1: PD 41 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  42-3 
Figure 42-2: PD 41 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  42-5 
Figure 43-1: PD 42 Existing Land Use Map ...................................................................................  43-3 
Figure 43-3: PD 42 Proposed Land Use Map ................................................................................  43-5 
 
 
 
 
  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
viii 
Abbreviations  
AAI Airport Authority of India 
ASI Archaeological Survey of India  
BBMP Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike 
BDA Bangalore Development Authority 
BESCOM Bangalore Electricity Supply Company Limited 
BHEL Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd. 
BIA Bangalore International Airport 
BIAL Bangalore International Airport Limited  
BIAPPA Bangalore International Airport Area Planning Authority 
BIEC Bangalore International Exhibition Centre 
BMA Bangalore Metropolitan Area 
BMIC Bangalore-Mysore Infrastructure Corridor 
BMICAPA Bangalore Mysore Infrastructure Corridor Area Planning Authority 
BMR Bangalore Metropolitan Region 
BMRCL Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Limited 
BMRDA Bangalore Metropolitan Region Development Authority  
BRT Bus Rapid Transit 
BSK Banashankari 
BSNL Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited 
BTM Bannerghatta-Taverekere-Madiwala 
BWSSB Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board 
C & D 
Lands Construcion and Demolition Waste Lands 
CAGR Compound Annual Growth Rate 
CBD Central Business District 
CDP Comprehensive Development Plan 
CDP (JN) City Development Plan (JNNRUM) 
CONCOR Container Corporation of India 
CPU Central Processing Unit 
CREDAI Confederation of ‘eal Estate Deǀelopeƌs͛ AssoĐiatioŶs of IŶdia  
CRS Commuter Rail System 
DAMH Department of Archaeology, Museums and Heritage 
DC  Deputy Commissioner 
DG Sets Diesel Generation Sets 
DTCP Directorate of Town & Country Planning 
DWCC  Dry Waste ColleĐtioŶ CeŶtƌe͛s  
ELCITA Electronics City Industrial Township Authority  
ELU Existing Land Use 
E-Waste Electronic Waste 
GIS Geographical Information System 
GKVK Gandhi Krishi Vignana Kendra  
GLR Ground Level Reservoir 
GLSR Ground Level Storage Reservoir 
GoI Government of India 
GoK Government of Karnataka  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
ix 
GP Gram Panchayat 
Ha Hectare 
HAL Hindustan Aeronautics Limited  
HH Household 
HHI House Hold Industries 
HMT Hindustan Machine Tools 
HPA Hosakote Planning Authority 
IAF Indian Air Force 
IIM Indian Institute of Management 
IISc Indian Institute of Science 
IMD Indian Meterological Department 
IPT Intermediate Para Transit 
ISPS Intermediate Sewage Pumping Station 
ISRO Indian Space Research Organization  
IT Information Technology 
IT/ ITES Information Technology / Information Technology Enabled Services  
ITI Industrial Training Institutes  
ITIR Information Technology Investment Regions 
ITPL International Tech Park Limited 
ITRR Intermediate Town Ring Road 
IWPU Integrated Waste Processing Unit 
KIA Kempegowda International Airport 
KIADB Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board 
KIAL Kempagowda International Airport Limited 
LPA Local  Planning Area 
MG Road Mahatma Gandhi Road 
MoEF Ministry of Environment and Forest  
MoUD Ministry of Urban Development  
MRT Metro Rail Transit  
NH National Highway 
NICE Nandi Infrastructure Corridor Enterprises 
NIFT National Institute of Fashion Technology  
NIMHANS National Institute of Mental Health and Neuroscience 
NMT Non Motorised Transport 
OHT Over Head Tank 
OMR Old Madras Road 
ORR  Outer Ring Road 
OWCC Organic Waste Converter 
PD Planning District 
PPH Persons Per Hectare 
PRR Peripherial Ring Road 
RMP Revised Master Plan 
RoW Right of Way 
RSP Revised Structure Plan 
RTO Regional Transport Office  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
x 
SEZ Special Economic Zone 
SH State Highway 
STP Sewage Treatment Plant 
STRR Satellite Township Ring Road 
SWD Storm Water Drain 
SWM Solid Waste Management 
SWR South Western Railway 
TG Thippagondanahalli 
TGR Thippagondanahalli Reservoir 
TTMC Travel and Transit Management Centre 
VTU Vishveshwarya Technological university 
WFPR Work Force Participation Rate 
ZR Zonal Regulations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
1-1 
1.Planning Districts for RMP 2031 
1.1 Background 
1. BDA has so far prepared four Master Plans (including ODP/CDP) for Bangalore, in  the past 
four decades. It is a constant effort to propose and regulate its development and growth.  
2. Following are the Four Plans that Bangalore has witnessed so far: 
 OutliŶe DeǀelopŵeŶt PlaŶ ;ODPͿ iŶ ϭϵϳϲ - Date of appƌoǀal of ODP ϭϵϳϲ: ϮϮ/Ϭϱ/ϭϵϳϲ  
 CoŵpƌeheŶsiǀe DeǀelopŵeŶt PlaŶ ϭϵϴϰ ;CDP͛ ϴϰͿ - Date of appƌoǀal of CDP ϭϵϵϱ: 
ϭϮ/ϭϬ/ϭϵϴϰ  
 CoŵpƌeheŶsiǀe DeǀelopŵeŶt PlaŶ ϭϵϵϱ ;CDP͛ϵϱͿ Date of appƌoǀal of ‘ CDP ϮϬϭϭ: 
Ϭϱ/Ϭϭ/ϭϵϵϰ  
 ‘eǀised Masteƌ PlaŶ ϮϬϭϱ ;‘MP ϮϬϭϱͿ - Date of Appƌoǀal of ‘MP ϮϬϭϱ: Ϯϱ.Ϭϲ.ϮϬϬϳ  
3. The concept of Planning District was brought for the first time in the CDP 1 984. A 
comprehensive contextual review of three master plans indicates that the purpose of the 
Planning District is to represent the Proposals of the master plan in greater details.  
4. The RMP 2015 is the first document to have systematically defined its criteria for the 
delineation of Planning Districts, by dividing the Local Planning Area boundaries into three 
spatial rings based on different issues and stakes in accordance to local body boundaries 
deliberated for administration and management. Within each ring, proposals are based on 
existing ground reality, impending issues, and the proposed zonal regulations. The Planning 
Districts in the RMP 2015 are based on administrative boundaries (wards of erstwhile B MP 
and Village boundaries, except for the core area). However, the year in which RMP 2015  was 
notified, in the same year the BMP was extended to create BBMP.  
5. The details like administrative boundaries (ward, zone, local body limits), cadastra l 
information (revenue survey numbers), physical features (water bodies, drainage system,  
forests), Utilities (High Tension Electricity lines, Water Installation, Sewage Installatio ns, etc) 
ĐaŶ͛t ďe ǀisualized at ĐitǇ leǀel. PlaŶŶiŶg DistƌiĐt ďeiŶg suďset of laƌgeƌ plaŶŶiŶg  aƌea pƌoǀides 
for ease of reading Plan proposals and thereby enforcemen t – the rationale used so far. This 
may mean that the Planning Districts are used for enforcement purpose only. It is ho wever 
noteworthy, that the Planning district boundaries however have no statutory functions. 
1.2 The Need 
6. The change in administrative boundaries (BMP to BBMP and changes to LPA of BDA), the 
objective is to use Planning Districts as Planning Tool and the enfo rcement and 
implementation of plan proposals are the reasons for change or revision and es tablishing the 
jurisdiction of planning districts for the Revised Master Plan 2031.  
7. Change in Administrative Boundaries: Just before the publication of Revised Master Plan 
2015, the municipal limits were extended and BBMP was formed in 2007 thro ugh the G.O 
.no. UDD 92 MNY 2006, dated 16 January 2007. The final notification o n 198 wards was 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
1-2 
issued in July 2009. The extent of BBMP is 711.50 sq km1 which is ~ 54% of BMA making it the 
single largest stakeholder in Master Plan enforcement and implementation. H ence, there is a 
need to establish the planning district boundaries based on Ward boundaries. After the 
publication of Revised Master plan 2015, in 2012, the extent of BMA/  LPA of BDA underwent 
amendment due to transfer of eight villages from the eastern part of LPA of BDA into the LPA 
of Hoskote Planning Authority2. The above mentioned administrative boundary changes 
necessitated establishing new planning districts in accordance with the new regim e. This is 
also in the view that funds, either from central or state government under various 
programmes/ schemes for developmental activities, flows to local authorities in line with 
their spatial extent.   
8. Planning Districts as Planning Tool: There are several characteristics that need attentio n right 
from the beginning; for example, negative growth rate in core city area, larg e patches of 
defence Land Use, the Namma Metro network, T.G Halli notification reduces the 
development potential of certain areas in NW of BMA etc.  Planning Districts can b e used to 
assess the infrastructure (physical & social) requirement at local area which can help in 
determining the status of development in different parts of the city. Thereby help in assigning 
appropriate land uses and other proposals. The population assignment  play a vital  role in 
formulating proposals for the RMP 2031. The criteria based delineation of  Planning Districts 
will allow appropriate grouping of similar areas and determine the future po pulation 
assignment at sub-city level; thereby guiding the sub-city level densities and FARs. The 
concept to use planning district as planning tool need have been embed rig ht from the 
beginning while formulating the jurisdiction of Planning Districts for RMP  2031.  
9. Enforcement and Implementation Mechanism: The rationale behind the defining Planning  
Districts of previous plans need to be continued for its benefits in master p lan enforcement. 
Implementation of Plan proposal is equally important for the indented devel opment. It 
therefore required bringing key stakeholders on board – BBMP, BWSSB, BESOM, Namma 
Metro, BMTC, Fire Department, Traffic Police and other important stakeholders for the 
ownership as well as implementation of plan proposals. The key to success lies in stakeh older 
departments aligning planning districts with the departments zoning and or divisions.   
1.3 The Delineation and Planning Districts of RMP 2031 
10. The review of previous Plans for Bengaluru, the data gathered and the objective of  having 
planning district has helped in listing potential parameters and then select ing the parameters 
for defining the jurisdictions of planning districts for RMP 2031.  
11. It has been observed that utility and infrastructure agencies or line departments (such as 
BESCOM, BWSSB, Fire Department, Traffic Police, etc.) functioning in BMA have their own 
administrative boundaries and service areas and do not converge at all. For example, the 
wards and municipal Boundaries of the BBMP do not match with the administrative 
areas/boundaries of the BMWSSB or BESCOM or even the Parliamentary Constituencies or 
                                                           
1 http://www.vigeyegpms.in/bbmp/ 
2 Through Notification no. UDD 36N BMR 2009 dated 26 September 2012, the 8 villages deleted from the 
BDA- LPA are: Anugondanahalli Hobli: Ajagonganahalli, Gullakajipura, Thiruml asettyhalli, Thimmanadahalli; 
from Kasaba Hobli: Bhattarahalli, Doddagattiganahalli, Koralur, Mallasandra.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
1-3 
Legislative Assembly Constituencies boundaries. So is the case of regulatory authorities like 
the Police Department or even the Fire Service Department. The service area of the 
Bangalore Transport Authority transcends Municipal and other local body boundaries. In this 
context, appropriate decision by the GoK is required so that the extent and jurisdictio n of all 
such agencies is BMA and planning districts forms administrative units of such agencies. Thi s 
will make the developmental process simple, rational, easily understood and help  the 
respective functional departments or line agency to effectively facilitate and service the 
areas; thereby the implementation of plan proposal made easier. 
12. The parameters used for delineating the planning district boundaries have bee n clubbed into 
six categories; namely- Administrative Boundaries, Democratic Representation, Population  
Considerations, Physical Features (Man-made) & Other Criteria, Natural & Environmental 
Features and the Mapping Scale. Each of these parameters discussed and deliberated to 
arrive at the final list of parameters. Table 1-1  presents the list of parameters considered for 
delineation of PD boundaries for RMP 2031 .  
Table 1-1: Parameters for Delineation of PD boundaries.  
Aspect Parameter  
Administrative Boundaries  BBMP Ward Boundary 
Taluk Boundary  
Hobli Boundary 
Gram Panchayat Boundary 
Population Considerations  Population Numbers 
Population Growth Rate 
Population Density 
Physical Features (Man-
made) & Other Criteria Road Network (Arterial Roads) 
Airport Funnel Zones 
Defence Area Zones 
Metro Rail Network 
Planning District boundaries of RMP 
2015  
Natural & Environmental 
Features Forest Areas 
Hills/ Hillocks 
Lakes 
T.G Halli Notification Area  
 
13. In all, 42 numbers of planning districts have been carved out for RMP 2031. Within BBM P 
there are 23 Planning Districts while outside BBMP but within LPA there are 19  planning 
Districts. Figure 1-1  depicts the jurisdiction of 42 Planning Districts, whereas Table 1-2  
presents list of wards/ villages falling within each delineated Planning District . As mentioned 
earlier, basis for jurisdiction of each planning district is different. Descriptio n hereunder on 
the formulation of planning district jurisdiction will help to explain further.  
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
1-4 
Figure 1-1: Planning Districts of RMP 2031 
 
i. Planning District 1 of Alternative 4 includes the areas within the core ri ng road, old core 
area of Bangalore the Pete areas, along with wards such as Vasanthnagar, Sampigenagar, 
Rajajinagar, Gandhinagar, Halsoor, Shivajinagar, K R Market etc. It has high intensity of 
commercial activity, and meeting points of major arterial roads like Old Madras road, KR 
road, Magadi road and inner ring road. Further, in future, it shall act as a transport 
interchange, with the Bangalore city railway station, the Majestic bus terminal along  with 
the proposed stations of Metro Rail network. As many as 10-15 stations of the  metro rail 
network are proposed in this area with four 4 routes across the 3 phases of metro rail 
shall traversing through this area. Due to the complexity of transport and mobility 
network, differential population densities, negative population growth and high  intensity 
commercial activity, this planning district is earmarked as a single, central entity.  

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
1-5 
ii. Planning Districts 2 and 3 are defined based on the location of defence lands (a t 
Jogupalya, Agara & Challaghatta, Byapanahalli) and the presence of the Air Funnel Zo ne 
of the HAL Airport. Additionally, decadal growth rate and population densities of the  
wards encompassing this area are considered.  
iii. Considering the TG reservoir catchment area, which is located in the North West region 
of the BDA-LPA, the extent of Planning Districts 19, 33, 41, 42 & 43 have bee n defined in 
accordance to the zones of TG halli reservoir. The distribution of plannin g districts within 
this sensitive zone provides an opportunity for balance approach while formul ating Plan 
proposals for these planning districts.  
iv. In the south and south east, the Challaghatta valley, and Hulimavu lake series and the 
Varthur Lake series in Koramangala have formed the basis for formulating planning 
districts 12 and 13 respectively. Likewise the area wherein Bannerghatta National Park is 
located and has a hillock, have been clubbed together to determine exte nts of Planning 
District 30. 
v. In the similar way, the jurisdictions of other planning districts have been determined.  
 
Table 1-2: Planning Districts of RMP 2031 
PD 
NO. PD Name Wards and Villages within Planning District PD within BBMP/ 
Outside BBMP 
1 Central District Jayamahal, Gayathri Nagar, Pulikeshi Nagar, 
Ulsoor, Bharathi Nagar, Shivaji Nagar, Vasanth 
Nagar, Gandhi Nagar, Subhash Nagar, 
Okalipuram , Dayananda Nagar, Prakash Nagar, 
Chikpete, Sampangiram Nagar , Shanthala 
Nagar, Sudam Nagar, Dharmarayaswamy 
Temple Ward, Cottonpet, K.R.Market. Within BBMP 
2 IndiraNagar - 
Kagadasapura Benniganahalli, C.V.Raman Nagar, 
Hosathippasandra, Maruthiseva Nagar, 
Sarvagna Nagar, Hoysala Nagar, Vignana Nagar, 
Jeevanbhima Naga , Jogupalya, Dommalur. Within BBMP 
3 Koramangala Agaram, Vannarpet, Neelasandra, Shanthi 
Nagar, Adugodi, Ejipura, Koramangala, 
Jakkasandra, HSR Layout. Within BBMP 
4 Jayanagar Sunkenahalli, Visvesvarapuram, Siddapura, 
Hombegowda Nagar, Lakkasandra, 
Sudduguntepalya, Jayangar, Basavangudi, 
Yadiyuru, Byrasandra. Within BBMP 
5 Rajajinagar Rajaji Nagar, Basaveshwara Nagar, Govindraja 
Nagara, Agrahara Dasarahalli, Dr.Rajkumar 
Ward, Shiva Nagar, Sri Rammandira, Binnipet, 
Kempapura Agrahara, Vijay Nagar, Hosahalli, 
Marenahalli, Maruthi Mandira Ward, 
Attiguppe, Hampi Nagar, Bapuji Nagar, Within BBMP 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
1-6 
PD 
NO. PD Name Wards and Villages within Planning District PD within BBMP/ 
Outside BBMP 
Padarayanapura, Jagareevanram Nagar, 
Rayapuram, Chalavadipalya, Chamrajpet, Azad 
Nagar, Gali Anjaneya Swamy Temple Ward. 
6 Yeshwantpur Jalahalli, J.P.Park, Aramane Nagar, Mathikere, 
Yeshwanthpur, H.M.T, Lakshmidevi Nagar, 
Nandini Layout, Marappana Palya, 
Malleshwaram,  Rajamahal ,  Kadumalleshwara 
,  Subramanya Nagar , Nagapura, 
Mahalakshmipuram, Dattathreya Temple  Within BBMP 
7 Hebbal Byatarayanapura, Kodigehalli, Vidyaranyapura, 
Doddabommasandra, Radhakrishna Temple, 
Sanjay Nagar, Ganga Nagar, Hebbal, 
Vishwanathnagenahalli, Manorayanapalya, 
Gangenahalli, Jayachamarajendra Nagar. Within BBMP 
8 Nagawara Thanisandra, Nagavara, HBR Layout , 
Kammanahalli , Kacharakanahalli, 
Kadugondanahalli, Kushal Nagar, 
Kavalbyrasandra, Devarajeevanahalli, 
Muneshwara Nagar, Lingarajapura, 
Sagayapuram, S.K.Garden, Ramaswamy Palya. Within BBMP 
9 Banaswadi Horamavu, Ramamurthy Nagar, Banasawadi, 
Hoodi. Within BBMP 
10 Krishnarajapuram Vijinapura, K.R.Puram, Basavanapura, 
Devasandra, A.Narayanapura, Hoodi. Within BBMP 
11 Whitefield Garudacharpalya, Kadugudi, Hagadooru, 
Doddanekkundi. Within BBMP 
12 Bellandur Marathalli, Hal Airport, Konena Agrahara, 
Bellandur. Within BBMP 
13 Arekere Hongasandra, Mangammanapalya, 
Singasandra, Begur, Arakere. Within BBMP 
14 J.P.Nagar Karisandra, Pattabhiram Nagar , Jayanagar 
East, Gurappanapalya, Madiwala, 
Bommanahalli, BTM Layout, J.P.Nagar, Sarakki, 
Shakambari Nagar, Banashankari Temple Ward, 
Kumaraswamy Layout, Yelachenahalli, 
Jaraganahalli, Puttenahalli, Bilekahalli. Within BBMP 
15 Kathriguppe Hanumantha Nagar, Sri Nagar, Hosakerehalli, 
Giri Nagar, Katriguppe, Vidyapeetha, 
Ganeshmandira Ward, Padmanabha Nagar, 
Chikkalasandra, Vasanthapura. Within BBMP 
16 Gottigere Uttarahalli, Gottigere, Konanakunte, Within BBMP 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
1-7 
PD 
NO. PD Name Wards and Villages within Planning District PD within BBMP/ 
Outside BBMP 
Anjanapur, Vasanthapura, Hemmigepura, 
Uttarahalli Manavarthi Kavalu, Mallasandra. 
17 Nayanadahalli Nagarabhavi, Jnanabharathi Ward, 
Nayandanahalli, Deepanjali Nagar, 
Rajarajeshwari Nagar. Within BBMP 
18 Peenya - 
Nagarbhavi Peenya Industrial Area, Laggere, Rajagopala 
Nagar, Kottigepalya, Shakthiganapathi Nagar, 
Shankaramata, Kamakshipalya, 
Vrushabhavathi, Kaveripura, Moodalapalya. Within BBMP 
19 Jalahalli - 
Jarakabandekaval Kuvempu Nagar, Shettyhalli, Mallasandra, 
Bagalagunte, T-Dasarahalli, Chokkasandra. Within BBMP 
20 Yelahanka Kempegowda, Chowdeshwari, Attur, Yelahanka 
Satellite, Jakkur. Within BBMP 
21 Marenahalli Marenahalli, Dasanayakanahalli, Chagalatti, 
Bagaluru, Yarappanahalli, Nadagowdagollahalli, 
Mittaganahalli, Kannur, Kadosonappanahalli, 
Doddenahalli, Chikkagubbi, Bommasandra. Outside BBMP 
22 Hirandahalli Vaddarahalli, Ramapura, Maragondanahalli, 
Kithiganur, Kada Agrahara, Huvina Ane, 
Hirandahalli, Halehalli, Doddagubbi(Srigubbi), 
Byappanahalli, Bidarahalli, Anagalapura, Adur. Outside BBMP 
23 Cheemasandra Kumbena Agrahara, Doddabanahalli, 
Veerenahalli, Shigehalli, Nimbekayapura, 
Kurudu Sonnenahalli, Konadasapura, 
Katamanallur, Kannamangala, Kajisonnenahalli, 
Goravikere, Dommasandra, Chikkabanahalli, 
Cheemasandra, Bidarena Agrahara, Belathur, 
Bandapura, Avalahalli. Outside BBMP 
24 Varthur Varthur, Valepura. Within BBMP 
25 Kodathi Sulakunte, Mallur, Kodathi, Kachamaranahalli, 
Halanayakanahalli, Chikkakanneli, 
Hadosiddapura, Chikkanayakanahalli. Outside BBMP 
26 Ramanayakanahalli Thigalachavadadenahalli, Ramanayikanahalli, 
Nekkundi Dommasandra, Kathriguppe, 
Heggondahalli, Halasahalli Thippasandra, 
Chikkavaderapura, Chikkanekkundi, 
Dommasandra. Outside BBMP 
27 Kaggalipura Thirupalya, Shingena Agrahara, Gulamangala, 
Shrirampura, Rayasandra, Madivala, 
Kommasandra, Kaggalipura, Huskuru, 
Hosahalli, Harohalli, Ghottamaranahalli, Outside BBMP 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
1-8 
PD 
NO. PD Name Wards and Villages within Planning District PD within BBMP/ 
Outside BBMP 
Ghuttihalli, Choodasandra, Chokkasandra, 
Chikkanagamangala, Avalahalli, Gollahalli, 
Hebbagodi, Veerasandra. 
28 Doddathoguru - 
Electronic City Vittasandra, Mylasandra, Konappana Agrahara, 
Hommadevanahalli, Doddathoguru, Dodda 
Nagamangala, Bettadasanapura. Outside BBMP 
29 Hulimangala Vabasandra, Nanjapura ,Maragondahalli 
,Hulimangala ,Sarvamanya Bangipura Outside BBMP 
30 Bannerughatta Badamanavarthikaval, Hullahalli, Vaderahalli, 
Sakalavara, Ramasandra, Nallasandra, 
Mantapa, Lakshmipura ,Kannaikana Agrahara, 
Kallakere, Hullakasavanahalli, Halesampigehalli, 
Gollahalli, Bhyrappanahalli, Bhoothanahalli, 
Bilvaaradahalli, Bhujengadasana Amanikere, 
Begihalli, Bannerugattada Kavalu, 
Bannerugatta, Obichudahalli, Mallasandra. Outside BBMP 
31 Agara Agara. Outside BBMP 
32 Kengeri Ullalu, Kengeri, Hemmigepura. Within BBMP 
33 Herohalli Dodda Bidarkallu, Hegganahalli, Herohalli, 
Thirumalapura, Chikkabidarakallu ,Srikantapura 
K G. Within BBMP 
34 Chikkabanwara Ganigerahalli, Chikkabanavara, 
Somashettahalli, Lakshmipura, Guladahalli, 
Shamarajapura,  Kempanahalli, Veerasagara, 
Vaderahalli, Medi Agrahara, Byalakere, 
Guniagrahara, Kalathammanahalli, 
Kasaghattapura, Kempapura, Kumbarahalli, 
Soladevanahalli. Outside BBMP 
35 Hunasamaranahalli Nagadasanahalli, Muddanahalli, 
Lakshmisagara, Gantiganahalli, 
Hunasamaranahalli, Sugatta, Bettahalasuru, 
Thimmasandra, Sonnappanahalli, Sathanuru, 
Byappanahalli, Nellukunte. Outside BBMP 
36 Kumbalagodu Chellagatta, Devageri, Doddabele, Gudimavu, 
Kambipura, Kanaminake, Kumbalagodu, 
Tagachiguppe, Venkatapura. Outside BBMP 
37 Dodda Aladamara Koluru Nanjundapura, Koluru Gurarayanapura, 
Chikkeluru Rampura, Chikkeluru, Chikkeluru 
Venkatapura, Kethohalli Narasipura, Kethohalli, 
Kethohalli Rampura, Koluru, Sheshagiripura. Outside BBMP 
38 Sulikere - Bhimanakuppe Ramasagar, Bhimanakuppe, Outside BBMP 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
1-9 
PD 
NO. PD Name Wards and Villages within Planning District PD within BBMP/ 
Outside BBMP 
Bheenakuppe Kenchanapura, Kommagatta, 
Kommagattakrishnapura, Maligondanahalli, 
Maragondanahalli 
Krishnasagar,Maragondanahalli, Ramasandra, 
Ramohalli, Sulikeri 
39 Sheegehalli Kodagihalli, Sheegehalli, Kannelli, 
Manganahalli, Yalachaguppe Rampura, 
Yalachaguppe, Channenahalli Outside BBMP 
40 Makali - Machohalli Siddanahosahalli, Dasanapura, Byandahalli, 
Machohalli, Kachohalli, Bylakonenahalli, 
Vaddarahalli, Lakkenahalli, Gangondanahalli, 
Srikantapura, Lakshmipura, Dombarahalli, 
Adakimaranahalli, Makali, Narayanapalya, 
Gavipalya, Kadaranahalli, Harokyathanahalli, 
Madavara. Outside BBMP 
41 Aluru Bilijaji, Sasiveghatta, Tarabanahalli, 
Thammarasanahalli, Hurlichikkanahalli, Kodagi 
Tirumalapura, Hesaraghatta, Thammenahalli, 
Hanumanthasagara, Kuduragere, 
Heggadadevanapura, Aluru, Muniyanapalya, 
Thorenagasandra, Narasipura. Outside BBMP 
42 Rajanakunte Shinganayakanahalli Amanikere, 
Shinganayakanahalli, Ramagondanahalli, 
Krishnasagara, Jarakabandekaval (T4), 
Honnenahalli, Avalahalli, Addiganhalli, 
Itagalpura, Kalenahalli, Lingarajasagara, 
Madappanahalli, Kondashettyhalli, 
Lingarajapura, Krishnarajapura, Rajakunte, 
Mavallipura, Linganahalli, Sheekoti, 
Madagirihalli, Muttakarahalli, Mylappanahalli, 
Ivarakandapura. Outside BBMP 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
2-1 
2.PD 1: Central Business District 
  
 
1. The Central District is the CBD and Administrative Centre for the  State. The extent 
admeasures 2774.3 Ha (27.74 sq km) comprising of 19 wards, - Jayamahal (63), Gayathri 
Nagar (76), Pulkeshi Nagar (78), Ulsoor (90), Bharath Nagar (91), Shivaji Nagar (92), Vasanth 
Nagar (93), Gandhi Nagar (94), Subash Nagar (95), Okalipuram (96), Dayanand Nagar (97 ), 
Prakash nagar (98), Chickpete (109), Sampanigaram (110), Shantala Nagar (111), Suda m 
Nagar (118), Dharamarayaswamt Temple ward (119), Cottonpet (120) and K.R.Market (139 ) 
and covers parts of West, East and South zone of BBMP.  
2. Vidhan Soudha, Vikas Soudha, Raj Bhavan, K.R.Market, Pete Area, Cubbon Park, Majestic Bus 
Stand, Chinnaswamy Stadium, etc. are located within this PD. 
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography 
3. As per Census 2011 had 5,93,883 residents and had witnessed negative decadal growth rate 
(2001-2011) with further increase in commercial activities.. The number of househo lds within 
PD are 1,32,600 whereas the HH size is 4.48 which is higher than BMA averag e of 4.01. The 
workforce participation rate is 40.2%.  
Administrative, Industry and Commerce 
4. Vidhan Soudha, Vikas Soudha, Raj Bhawan, MS Building, and head offices of many 
Government departments are located here ,making it the administrative hub for the State 
and the City. 
5. It is the Central Business District (CBD) of Bengaluru and has concentration of trade and 
commerce activities at Peta (the historic core and market), Shivajinagar (the market and 
extension of erstwhile cantonment), and the MG road, commercial street, brigade road, etc. 
housing the commercial hub of the city. A part of Malleshwaram Sampige road market is par t 
Population (2011 Census): 5,93,883 
Area of PD: 2774.3 ha 
Wards in PD: 19 
Gross Density: 214PPH  
Central District (PD 1) is located in core of 
the BMA. It houses the Historical Pete, 
Business & Offices and the Government 
Administrative Offices. Several heritage 
sites reflect the heritage and culture of 
the city. It is extremely well connected 
with Major radial roads radiating from 
the centre and has Railway Stations, Bus 
terminus, Metro Stations etc .  
 
The RMP2031 proposes to guide the 
development and redevelopment in the 
area and stabilize the commercialization. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
2-2 
of this PD. There are many informal shops and commercial activities surroundin g Majestic 
Bus Station and Bangalore Railway Station. The important markets are: Frazer Town market, 
Moore Road market, Ulsoor market, Srirampura Market, Kalasipalya, and KR market . The 
continuous influx of commercial activities in former residential areas such as Malleshwaram, 
Rajaram Mohan Roy Extension (Sudama nagar) located at west of Double Road has changed 
the characteristics of the area. 
Existing Land Use  
6. The predominant land uses is residential and commercial land use covering ~24 .9 % and 
~21.14 % of area respectively. The Public –semi-public land use zone, admeasuring 16.53% is 
primarily the Administrative and Governance offices. The area under transportation is 
~15.8%. Figure 2-1  and Table 2-1  presents the Existing Land Use Map Existing Land Use Area 
Statement and for PD 1.  
Housing and Slums 
7. Gross density is 214 pph, whereas net residential density is 858 pph. Ward with highest  
density is Shivajinagar with a density of 872 pph and the ward with lowest density is Shantala 
Nagar ward (57.6pph) which has many defense areas, commercial areas and Public Semi-
Public land uses.  
8. Residential areas are concentrated in a few wards like Gayatri Nagar, Prakash Nagar, Dayanad 
Nagar, Subash Nagar, Jayamahal, Halasoor, Pulkeshi Nagar, Vasant nagar and Shivaji Nagar.  
9. There are 69 slums in this PD, and of which 35 slums are notified. Subhash Nagar Ward (ward 
no 95) with 14 slums has the highest number of slums. The population residing in these slums 
is 71689 (12% of the total PD population).  
Figure 2-1 : PD 1 Existing Land Use Map  
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
2-3 
Table 2-1 : PD 01 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 702.68 25.33  
Commercial 586.52 21.14  
Industrial 54.47 1.96  
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00  
Public Semi Public 458.51 16.53  
Unclassified 148.33 5.35  
Public Utility 7.72 0.28  
Parks & Open Spaces 230.50 8.31  
Transport Communication 431.00 15.54  
Vacant 101.98 3.68  
Agriculture 0.00 0.00  
Forest 0.00 0.00  
Streams 9.40 0.34  
Water Bodies 43.04 1.55  
Total 2774.28  100.00  
 
Traffic and Transportation 
10. In addition to being a Central Business District and Administrative Centre, it is  also a major 
Transport Hub catering to the whole city and the region. Two major Railway Stations -   
Bangalore City Railway station and Cantonment Railway station, three major bus termin us  - 
Majestic, KR market and Shivajinagar are located within the PD. Kempegowda Bus Stand is 
the only intermodal interchange hub in the city, integrated with Railways, Metro, KSRT C and 
BMTC Bus services. 
11. Metro services are available and easily accessible, the existing Phase – I coverage including 13 
metro stations (8 stations of Purple Line and 5 stations of Green line) and the proposed 
metro phase II network also possessing through, with MG Road metro station acti ng as the 
interchange and 2 metro stations proposed in this PD.  
12. Around 494 km is the total road length within the PD. The major arterial road s in this PD are 
Inner Ring Road, K.R. Road, Kalasipalya Main Road, J.C. Road, Kasturba road, Cotto npette 
main road, Museum road, Richmond road, Residency Road, Avenue road. The cri tical 
junctions that see congestion are Pottery Town circle junction, Shivananda, Upparapet 
junction, Corporation circle, Queens Statue Circle Junction (Jewels De Paragon) and Lal bagh 
main gate. 
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
13. As per BWSSB, the percentage of metered water supply connections in this PD are 51.9 % and 
percentage of metered sewage and sanitation connections are 52.7%.3   As per BBMP, there 
are 1 Bio-Methanation Units (BMU), 13 Dry Waste Collection Centres (DWCC) located in this 
PD.4 As per KPTCL, there are two 220kv substations.  
                                                           
3 BWSSB, 2014 
4 BBMP, 2015 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
2-4 
14. City level social infrastructure  such as sports facilities are present which are the 
Chinnaswamy Stadium, Sree Kantiveera Stadium, Bangalore Football stadium and 
Shanthinagar Hockey Stadium. Likewise, the educational Institutions are also present such as 
the Chitrakala Parishath, Sri Krishnarajendra Silver Jubilee Technological Institute, University 
Visvesvaraya College of Engineering, Government Arts & Sciences College, City campus of 
BaŶgaloƌe UŶiǀeƌsitǇ, CeŶtƌal College, MahaƌaŶi͛s College, Bishop CottoŶ SĐhool, St. Joseph͛ s 
College Buildings, Good Shepherd Convent. Additionally, presence of cultural institution s 
such as NGMA, Chowdiah Hall, Govt. Museum, Visveshvaraya Science & Technology Museum 
etc. are located within this PD attracting population from across the country, state and city . 
Park and Open Spaces 
15. City level parks like Cubbon Park, Freedom Park, Indira Gandhi Musical Foun tain Park are 
located here along with open spaces/ lung spaces, such as Ulsoor lake precinct, the Race 
Course and the Bangalore Golf Club. Ulsoor Lake is the only lake in this PD. 
Heritage and Culture 
16. It is note-worthy that this planning district forms the Heritage Core for the BMA, as the  
Archaeology Survey of India (ASI) protected monument of Old Dungeon Fort and  Gates, 
Department of Archaeology, Museums and Heritage, GoK enlisted 2 heritage sites, an d 
RMP2031 identified 321 heritage sites are located here. The Kempegowda Watch Tower at 
Ulsoor and the Bowring Institute as State protected buildings. 
17. Out of 321 heritage sites, 191 are Government or public heritage sites. Some of the  Heritage 
ďuildiŶgs aŶd sites suĐh as the BaŶgaloƌe Foƌt, Tippu͛s Summer Palace, Bangalore Palace, 
TƌiŶitǇ ChuƌĐh, HudsoŶ Meŵoƌial ĐhuƌĐh, Soŵeshǁaƌ teŵple, St. MaƌǇ͛s BasiliĐa, CƌesĐeŶ t 
house. The Annexure 1 presents details of the heritage sites. 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: REDEVELOPMENT, DECONGESTION, TRANSIT INTEGRATION AND 
HERITAGE CONSERVATION 
PROPOSALS 
1. The governing principal is to stabilize the commercialisation respecting the local economic 
activities. The RMP2031 proposes to guide the development and redevelopment in  this 
Central Business District such that there is a wholesome approach to infrastructure 
upgradation and livability. Further, it is proposed to decentralize the intra-city an d intra-
region traffic movement by developing Inter-state bus terminals along Tu mukuru Road, 
Hosur Road, OMR, Mysuru Road, etc.  
2. The Proposed Land Use map for PD 1 is given in Figure 2-2  and Proposed Land Use area 
statement is presented in Table 2-3 .  
3. In order to improve the accessibility to public transport systems, it is p roposed to have first 
and last mile connectivity through walkability/ the Non-motorized transport (NM T) around 
the Metro stations and railways stations.  
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
2-5 
Figure 2-2 : PD 1 Proposed Land Use Map   
 
 
Table 2-2: PD 01 Proposed Land Use Area Statement  
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 674.74 17.20 
Commercial 614.64 15.67 
Industrial 5.57 0.14 
Public & Semi Public 434.22 11.07 
Unclassified 132.26 3.37 
Public Utility 7.63 0.19 
Parks / Open Spaces 213.49 5.44 
Transport & Communication 527.00 13.43 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 0.16 0.00 
Water Bodies 0.80 0.02 
NGT Buffer 163.77 4.17 
Total Developable Area 2774.28 70.72 
Agriculture 0 - 
Total PD Area 2774.28 - 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
2-6 
4. The RMP2031 acknowledging the historic and heritage value associated in many areas has 
proposed for their conservation and protection and also by guiding develop ment within and 
surrounding historic sites. It is proposed that that areas of Pete, Shivajinagar, KR  market area, 
Kalasiplaya area to be taken up for redevelopment along with the protection of i ts heritage. 
The redevelopments of the areas are to be guided by the Zoning Regulations. 
5. The RMP2031 proposes that slum redevelopment be taken up in a phased manner.   
6. The open spaces and parks are proposed to be maintained and given good accessibility  and 
improvement in parking facilities.  
7. RMP2031 proposes that BBMP, in accordance with the provisions of Street Vending Act, 
2015, determines the areas for Informal activities/ Street Vending and detailed up gradation 
plans for such areas/ roads/ streets are prepared.  
8. To improve the public transport share it is proposed to develop a) Light Rail /Mono Rail from 
Trinity Metro Station to Varthur Kodi, b) Cubbon Park to Jakkur and c) In termediate Ring 
Road.  
9. Following Light/ Mono Rail stations are proposed within this PD: 
a) Trinity Interchange, on Trinity to Varthur Kodi link 
b) Near Coles Park and Cantonment Railway Station (on Intermediate Ring Road Mono 
Rail Link)  
c) Cubbon Park Metro Station 
10. The RMP2031 proposes to develop 2 Inetrmodal Interchange hubs in P D1 namely at – a) 
Cantonment and b) Trinity Circle. 
11. Towards parking, RMP2031 proposes that a details parking plan need to be prepared for 
areas/ roads. Vidhan Soudha-Cubban Park-High Court Area, CBD area, Pette Area, Shi vaji 
Nagar, Market Areas like City Market, KR Market, Russel Market, Corporation Circle/ Hud son 
Circle – Mysore Bank Circle Road Stretch, SP Road Area, etc. A Multi-Level Car Parking (M LCP) 
by BBMP is proposed at Freedom Park which when completed would accommodate abo ut 
556 Light Motor Vehicles (LMVs) and 500 two wheelers.  
12. The RMP2031 identifies 9 critical road junctions that require geometric improvements  for 
better and smoother traffic flow.  
13. To cater to future management and operations of Solid Waste in future, it is proposed that in 
addition to existing facilities, 42 Dry Waste Collection Centres are proposed to be developed 
within the Planning District by BBMP.  
14. To increase green cover across the city, provide comfort to pedestrians and im prove street 
aesthetics, the RMP2031 proposes road side and avenue plantation for arterial roads, sub-
arterial and important roads in the Central Business District be taken up by BBMP. 
15. The ASI regulation mandates, 100 m from the boundary of the monument to be a Prohib ited 
area that prohibits for mining or any construction or both. The contiguous 200 m of an ASI 
protected building falls under the Regulated area mandates that no other person other than 
an archaeological officer can undertake any construction in this area, except in acco rdance 
with the terms and conditions of a license granted by the Director-General of th e ASI. Similar 
restrictions are imposed on the 2 heritage sites namely - the Kempegowda Watch Tower at 
Ulsoor and Bowring Institute as State protected buildings. Further, it is proposed that 19 1 
Government/ public buildings are proposed to be declared as heritage sites and restriction s 
as imposed by Zoning Regulations be applicable to these buildings.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
2-7 
16. The RMP2031 proposes 12 heritage zones in total, out of which 6 heritage zones are 
proposed within PD 1. Within these heritage zones are the heritage sites that require 
protection with appropriate regulations for development or redevelopment. The pro posed 6 
Heritage Zones and precincts therein, in this Central District PD, are as following: 
I. Central Administrative Heritage Zone [Refer Figure 2- 3] 
a. Precinct 1: Administrative Complex of the Vidhan Soudha, Vikas Soudha and High 
Court 
b. Precinct 2: Cubbon park and surrounding Buildings Precinct 
c. Precinct 3: Rest of the area of the Central Administrative Area 
II. Petta Heritage Zone [Refer Figure 2- 4] 
a. Precinct 1: BaŶgaloƌe Foƌt aŶd Tippu͛s Suŵŵeƌ PalaĐe PƌeĐiŶĐt  
b. Precinct 2: KR Market, jamma Masjid and Puttanachetty Town Hall Precinct 
III. MG Road Heritage Zone [Refer Figure 2- 5] 
IV. Shivajinagar Heritage Zone [Refer Figure 2- 6]  
V. Cleveland Town Heritage Area [Refer Figure 2-7] 
VI. Ulsoor Heritage Area [Refer Figure 2-8] 
 
Figure 2-3: PD 1 Central Administrative Heritage Zone 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
2-8 
Figure 2-4 : PD 1 Pette Heritage Zone  
 
Figure 2-5 : PD 1 MG Road Heritage Zone 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
2-9 
Figure 2-6 : PD 1 Shivajinagar Heritage Zone 
 
 
Figure 2-7 : PD 1 Cleveland Town Heritage Zone 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
2-10 
Figure 2-8 : PD 1 Ulsoor Heritage Zone 
 
17. Disaster & Hazard Mitigation Plan for Pette Area: Pette is highly dense both in terms of 
population and building density, and is at high risk to Disaster, Fire, & Emergency Situations, 
posing risk to Human Safety and Economic Losses. It therefore proposed that Disaster & 
Hazard Mitigation Plan (DHMP) for Pette Area should be prepared. It is proposed that a mini-
fire station at Pette Area to be developed. The DHMP may look into but not limited to:  
a. Providing Means of Access to Emergency Services 
b. Facilitating Easy Evacuation of Local People (residents and working people) 
c. Providing Infrastructure/ facilities like Fire Hydrants, Assembly Areas, mini-fire 
stations, provision for Ambulance, etc 
d. Imposition of Certain Restricting posing risk to Humans and Economy 
e. Circulation Pattern/ Defined Movement of Vehicular Traffic and Non-Vehicular 
Traffic.  
f. Stations Area/ Accessibility Improvement Plan 
g. Upgradation of Physical Infrastructure (Development roads, underground cabling of 
power lines, telecommunication lines, Disc TV/ DTH cables, optic fiber, etc.  
h. Parking Plan & Development of MLCP 
i. Time Restrictions on carrying out certain activities and business, etc 
j. Any other aspect that may be found relevant and require 
 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD1, Central District: 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
2-11 
 
1. Development of Public Transport Systems : In addition to existing (including under 
implementation projects like Metro (Phase II), the following are proposed  
a. Light Rail/ Mono Rail at Varthur,  
b. Light Rail/ Mono on Old Airport Road  
c. Light Rail/ Mono on Bellary Road 
2. Development of Intermodal Interchange Stations:  
a. Cantonment Railway Station  
b. Trinity Circle  
3. Accessibility Improvement Plans for stations and educational instituti ons. 
4. Junction Improvement Programme (JIP):  
a. Trinity circle junction,  
b. Shoolay circle junction,  
c. Lalbagh main gate junction,  
d. Minerva circle junction,  
e. Pottery circle junction,  
f. QueeŶ͛s Statue ĐiƌĐle juŶĐtioŶ,  
g. Uppalpet police station junction and  
h. Corporation circle  
5. Preparation of Parking Plans for Commercial Areas/ Public Buildings / Places:  
a. Vidhan Soudha-Cubban Park-High Court Area 
b. CBD area 
c. Petta Area 
d. Shivaji Nagar 
e. Market Areas like City Market, KR Market, Russel Market, and others, 
f. Corporation Circle/ Hudson Circle – Mysore Bank Circle Road Stretch 
g. SP Road Area 
6. Area Redevelopment: Following areas are proposed to be taken up under Area 
Redevelopment: 
a. Pette Area 
b. Kalasipalyam (including Extension) Area 
c. City Market Area 
d. Shivaji Nagar 
e. Shultangunta  
f. Sampangi Rama Nagar 
7. Preparation of Slum Redevelopment Plans 
8. Preparation of Heritage Area Protection and Conservation Scheme  
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
3-1 
3.PD 02: INDIRANAGAR - KAGADASAPURA 
  
 
1. The Indiranagar -Kagadasapura comprises of 10 wards, - and covers parts of West, East and 
South zone of BBMP of 10 wards namely Benniganahal- li (50), C.V.Raman Nagar (57), 
Hosathippasandra (58), Maruthiseva Nagar (59), Sarvagna Nagar (79), Hoysala Nagar (80 ), 
Vignana Nagar (81), Jeevanbhima Nagar (88), Jogupalya (89) and Dommalu r (112); all falling 
within the Bangalore East administrative zone of BBMP.  
2. Public sector enterprises like BEML, ISRO, NAL, HAL, and Defence area along wi th Commercial 
Area of Indira Nagar/ Domluru, and Tech Parks like Bagamane, World Centre, RMZ Infinity  
Tech Park etc are the major employment centres within this planning district.  
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography 
3. As per Census 2011, PD has 4,24,517 inhabitants, which has increased by 27.41% from 2 001 
(3,33,189) and there are 189299 (44.59%) resident workers. There are 111146 households 
(2011), with Avg. Household size being 3.84, which is lower than BMA (4.0 1). The gross 
density is 140 pph, whereas the average residential density is 423 pph. The gross density  is 
highest in Jogupalya ward (371 pph) and least in Vignana Nagar ward (99 ppha). 
 
Industry and Commerce 
4. Many of the coloni al-era military bases are now defence owned lands. The fabric of the area 
post-independence was also shaped by the seeing up of Public Sector Units such as BEML, 
HAL, NAL & now defunct NGEF. The strategic location of the PD between the CBD and 
Whitefield, and development of metro has transformed it from being defence & residenti al 
Population (2011 Census): 4,24,517 
Area of PD: 3022.62 ha 
Wards in PD: 10 
Gross Density: 140PPH  
 
Kagadasapura - Indiranagar (PD 2) is 
located is core of the BMA. It is 
characterized by presence of large public 
sector enterprises, planned residential 
layouts, DRDO Township and Tech Parks.  
 
The RMP2031 proposes retain the 
residential characteristic by restricting 
further commercialisation of areas such 
as Indiranagar and Domulur and 
Transport Integration.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
3-2 
area to shopping destination of the city. BEML, HAL & NAL, ADA, ITC Factory, Bagam ane 
Tech- park, RMZ Infinity Tech Park, Bagamane World Technology Centre, etc are the maj or 
employment centres within PD.  
5. The commercial establishment on CMH road, Indiranagar 100feet road, New Thippasand ra 
Road, Dodda Banasawadi Main road, Gopalan Mall, provides employment in  commercial 
activities. Also, Vegetable Markets in Indira Nagar, HAL, Cox Town, Domluru, Jeevan- Bima 
Nagar, Kaggadaspura, etc provide employment in unorganised sector. 
 
Land Use  
6. Residential land use is predominant use with ~33% total PD area being used for resi dential 
purpose. Public-Semi Public Use (mostly Defence), with large scale government and defence 
establishments, religious buildings, and educational institutions, is the second predo minant 
use accounting for ~26%. Transport and Communication Land Use accounts for around  14% 
of the PD area. The vacant land use accounts for 8.8% of total area, which indicates the 
potential infilling of population/ other activities in near future. The commercial  land use 
accounts for 4.58% which is more that Parks and Open spaces accounting for 2.73% of to tal 
PD area.  
7. Figure 3-1  and Table 3-1  present the Existing Land Use Map and Existing Land Use Analysis 
respectively 
Figure 3-1 : PD 2 Existing Land Use Map  
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
3-3 
Table 3-1 : PD 02 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 1000.62 33.10 
Commercial 137.86 4.56 
Industrial 106.46 3.52 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 113.66 3.76 
Unclassified 789.54 26.12 
Public Utility 10.39 0.34 
Parks & Open Spaces 79.34 2.62 
Transport Communication 422.91 13.99 
Vacant 280.22 9.27 
Agriculture 0.00 0.00 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 8.97 0.30 
Water Bodies 72.64 2.40 
      
Total 3022.62  100.00  
 
Housing and Slums 
8. Residential areas are characterized by planned residential layouts - HAL Layout, Indi ra Nagar, 
Jeevan Beema Nagar, Domaluru, Thippasandara, DRDO Township, Kaggadaspura, CV Raman 
Nagar, etc. The total number of households residing in residential areas of the PD is 111146 
(Census 2011), with 424517 inhabitants.  
9. There are 42 slums in this PD, and of which 20 slums are notified. Sarvagna Nagar War d 
(ward no 79) with 11 slums has the highest number of slums. The population residing in these 
slums is 44317 (10.4% of the total PD population). Annexure 1 presents the details of the 
slums.  
 
Traffic and Transportation 
10. Old Madras Road, Old Airport Road, Outer Ring Road, Indiranagar 100 ft Road, S uranjan Das 
Road and Dodda Banasawadi main road are the major arterial roads passing through the P D 
having heavy traffic movement.  
11. Two railway lines passes through the PD. Baiyappanahalli Railway Yard, Baiyappanahal li 
Railway Station and Banaswadi Railway Station are located on these railway lines. 
Baiyappanahalli Railway Yard is proposed to be developed as world class rai lway station to 
decongest City railway station. Accessibility to it is the major concern due to developments in 
surrounding is at different levels at which different transit systems are positioned.  
12. Metro services are available and easily accessible, the existing Phase – I passes through this 
PD (with 3 stations of Purple line). The construction of proposed extension to Wh itefield and 
Phase –II the stretch starting from KRPuram to Silk Board, along the Outer ring road; part of 
which falls inside this PD (2 stations) is ongoing.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
3-4 
13. One BMTC Depot, two BMTC bus stands - Domlur and Jeevan Beema Nagar, one 
Narayanapalya Bus station and one KSRTC Satellite Bus Stand. The proposed world class  
railway station needs to be integrated with Mono & BMTC bus service for multi-moda l 
integration for better passenger transport. 
14. The major arterial roads in this PD are Swami Viveknanda road/ Old Madras Road, Old Airport 
Road, Indiranagar 100 ft Road, Suranjan Das Road and Dodda Banasawadi that see heavy 
traffic movement. 
15. Critical junctions are Domlur Flyover, Baiyappanahalli Junction/ NGEF Junction, Swa mi 
Vivekanand Junction, BEML Junction, Vignana Nagar Junction (near bus stand), Indian  Oil 
Bridge on Doda Banaswadi Main road, HAL. 
 
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
16. As per BWSSB, the percentage of metered water supply connections in this PD are 39.4 % and 
percentage of metered sewage and sanitation connections are 40.2%.5 As per BBMP, there 
are 1 Bio-Methanation Unit (BMU), 9 Dry Waste Collection Centres (DWCC) and 1 leaf li tter 
are located in this PD.6 As per KPTCL, there are 5 number of 66kv substations.  
17. Social infrastructure in this PD; there are around 155 schools and number of educati onal and 
ƌeseaƌĐh iŶstitutioŶs suĐh as the Dƌ. Aŵďedkaƌ IŶstitute foƌ MaŶageŵeŶt Studies, DaphŶe͛s 
IŶteƌŶatioŶal TeaĐheƌs͛ TƌaiŶiŶg IŶstitute, SGT Collage, CM‘ Laǁ SĐhool, Jain Collage, New 
Horizon collage, etc. Further, there are 29 healthcare facilities (Government and private 
health centres/ hospitals) with a total of 842 beds which includes ESI Hospital Chinma ya 
Mission Hospital, Isolation Hospital, etc. Though there is no Fire station within the Planning 
district, there is one graveyard - Laxmipura Graveyard.  
 
Park and Open Spaces 
18. There are several Parks and open spaces primarily being neighbourhood parks. The large 
scale defence & public sector enterprises are acting as lung spaces. Defunct NGEF has large 
green cover. 
 
Lakes and Drainage 
19. Bagmani/ Melina Kere, Kaggadasapura/ Byrasandra Kere, Kelagina Kere, Mahadevpura Kere/ 
Nakkundi Kere and Vibhutipura Kere (also called L B Sastry Nagar lake) are the existing lakes.  
20. There are several areas which are low lying and flood prone. Some of them are - south east of 
Kagadasapura, south of Vibhutipura Lake, north of LCA complex, Saraswatipuram, Shirdi Sai 
Baba Mandir Road, 2 nd cross road south west of Baiyappanahalli Goods Yard, west of the 
Baiyappanahalli metro Station and the Chinnapana Layout (near Mahadevapura Lake). 
 
Heritage and Culture 
21. There are 30 sites of heritage value; such as the Red Cross Home, Chokkanathaswamy 
Temple, Murphy Town Market & Fraser Town Police Station amongst others. Cooke Town &  
Cox Town area were part of residential areas of British military base which has old-world 
                                                           
5 BWSSB, 2014 
6 BBMP, 2015 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
3-5 
character of bungalows, good roads & parks. There are urban extensions centered around on 
temples & revenue villages, such as Ulsoor, Doddakunte & Binnamangala.  
22. Several planned residential layouts were developed after independence which include HAL 
Layout, Indiranagar, New Thippasandra, Domlur, Konena Agrahara, C V Raman Nagar, DRDO 
Township, Kasturi Nagar, etc. 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: REDEVELOPMENT, STABILISATION, TRANSIT INTEGRATION A ND 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION 
 
PROPOSALS 
 
1. The governing principal is to maintain the sanctity of the residential zone by stabili zing the 
commercialization of the residential areas , Integration of Public Transport Systems and 
protection of lakes and streams.  
2. The Proposed Land Use Map and land use analysis is presented in Figure 3-2  and Table 3-2  
respectively.  
Figure 3-2 : PD 2 Proposed Land Use Map   
 
 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
3-6 
Table 3-2: PD 02 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 1181.21 42.21 
Commercial 44.22 1.58 
Industrial 86.56 3.09 
Public & Semi Public 99.38 3.55 
Unclassified 914.55 32.68 
Public Utility 7.63 0.27 
Parks / open spaces 67.92 2.43 
Transport & Communication 363.35 12.98 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 7.30 0.26 
Water Bodies 56.46 2.02 
NGT Buffer 194.02 6.93 
Total Developable Area 3022.62 108.00 
Agriculture 0 - 
Total PD Area 3022.62 - 
 
3. In order to improve the accessibility to public transport systems, it is p roposed to have first 
and last mile connectivity through walkability/ the Non-motorized transport (NM T) around 
the Metro stations and railways stations.  
4. The RMP2031 recognizes the present status of slums and the potential for in- situ (to the 
extent possible). Redevelopment of Slums and is proposed to be taken up. 
5. Re-development of areas like Bennigana Halli, Nagayana Palya, Sathiya Nagar, Byrasandra, 
Kaggadasapura, Virabhadra Nagar, BMK Nagar are proposed to be taken- up on priority. 
6. RMP2031 proposes that BBMP, in accordance to the provisions of Street Vend ing Act, 2015, 
determines the areas for Informal activities/ Street Vending and detailed upgradation plans 
for such areas/ roads/ streets are prepared.  
7. To improve the public transport share it is proposed to develop Mono Rail/ l ight rail on the 
intermediate ring road and the stretch within this planning districts includes Interm ediate 
ring road (from EGL Business Park till Domaluru Flyover) Indiranagar 100 ft ro ad, CMH Road, 
Indiraa Nagar 80ft Road (Kodihalli Main Road), meeting Swami Vivekananda M etro Station, 
and connecting proposed World Class Station at Baiyapanahalli.Railway Station al ong 
Baiyapanahalli road and then running along the Dodda Banaswadi Main Road and pottery 
road then continues towards Cantonment Railway Station. Stations proposed are near EGL 
Business Park, Gangarams Bus Stop, Domaluru Flyover Bus, Doopanahalli Main Bus Stop , 
Indiranagar 6 th Main Road, Indira Nagar Bus Stop, Chinmaya Mission Hospital, Swami 
Vivekananda Metro Interchange Station, Baiyapanahalli Railway Station (Yard), Maruthi 
Sevanagar, Jai bharat Nagar, ITC Factory and Indian Gymkhana.  
8. The RMP2031 proposes 4 Intermodal Interchanges which includes Swami Vivekananda Metro 
Station, Domaluru Interchange, Byapannhalli Metro Station and proposed World Class 
Byapanahalli Railway Station.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
3-7 
9. Further, to improve overall connectivity within and with other areas outside planning d istrict 
following improvements are proposed network connectivity enhancement: 
a. Signal Free & Pedestrian Friendly Old Madras Road: It is proposed to develop  Old Madras 
as a signal free and pedestrian friendly corridor from Ulsoor Lake to KR Puram Fly over so 
as to provide through and seamless traffic movement and providing pedestrian crossing 
at critical points – like at RMZ Millenia, Junction of Thamarai Kannan Rd, Indira Nagar Bus 
Depot Junction, Indiranagar BDA Complex (Double Road Junction), Ind iranagar 100ft Rd 
Junction, Isolation/ TB Hospital, Swami Vivekananda Metro Station, NGEF Junction,  
Srinivaspura Bus Stop/ Baiyappanahalli Metro Station, Suddaguntepalya Junction, 
Benniganahalli Bus Stop, etc. This is to be done through segregation of vehicular traffic 
and pedestrian facilities, provision of elevated road/ vehicular underpasses and 
geometric improvement of junctions.  
b. Connectivity between Kaggadasapura and Outer Ring Road: It is proposed to connect 
PWD road with ORR by connecting DRDO Phase 2 Township road with Road ter minating 
at DRDO Phase 2 Township Boundary (Ranganatha Layout). 
c. Connection between OMR and Proposed World Class Railway Station at Baiyapannah alli 
Railway Station: It is proposed that a existing NGEF Road be widened and extended to 
connect Baiyappanhalli Road.  
d. Redevelopment of Dadda Banasawadi Flyover/ Cloverleaf: It is proposed that Dodda 
Banaswadi Flyover/ Cloverleaf be redeveloped to widen and include slip arm connect ing 
Baiyppanhalli Road providing connectivity/ access to proposed world class rail way 
station. 
e. Overall Geometric Improvement of Certain Roads: RMP2031 proposes overall geom etric 
improvement of certain roads which includes uniform right of way and cross  –section, 
provision of Pedestrian and wherever possible NMT facilities. Also include i mprovement 
of junction on these roads.  
Figure 3-3: PD 2 Proposed Road Connection DRDO to ORR 
 
 
 
Proposed Connection
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
3-8 
Figure 3-4: PD 2 Proposed ROB for Connecting Kaggadasapura Mai n Road 
 
Figure 3-5: PD 2 Proposed Road at NGEF junction 
 
Figure 3-6: PD 2 Proposed Redevelopment of Dadda Banasawadi Flyover  
 
Area Proposed for 
Development of ROB

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
3-9 
10. RMP2031 proposes that a detailed parking plan be prepared for Indiranagar Dou ble Road 
(and cross roads), Indiranagar 100ft road (including cross/ main road), CMH Road (and cross 
roads), Kodihalli Main Road (and cross roads), New Thippasandra Road (and cross roads) an d 
Thippasandra Market Area, Dodda Banasawadi Main Road, BEML Main Road/ KH Main Road.  
11. The RMP2031 proposes the lake protection and rejuvenation of Bagmani/ Mel ina Kere, 
Kaggadasapura/ Byrasandra Kere, Kelagina Kere, Mahadevpura Kere/ Nakkundi Kere and 
Vibhutipura Kere (also called L B Sastry Nagar lake), and its natural streams by preparing lake 
and surrounding area development plan.   
 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD2 Indiranagar - Kaggadasapura District: 
 
1. Road Development Plan:  
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Catego ry -1 
Roads.  
b. Signal Free & Pedestrian Friendly Old Madras Road 
c. Connectivity Improvements Projects: 
i. Kaggadasapura and Outer Ring Road 
ii. CV Raman Nagar and Geethanjali Layout/ Indiranagar  
d. Redevelopment of Dadda Banasawadi Flyover/ Cloverleaf  
e. Overall Geometric Improvement of Certain Roads 
i. Baiyappanhalli Main Road (including completion of flyover over railway lin e),  
ii. Kaggadasapura Main Road,  
iii. Namjoshi Main Road,  
iv. GM Palya Main Road,  
v. BEML Main Road,  
vi. Varthur Road,  
vii. Nagavarpalya Main Road,  
viii. PWD Road + 4th Main Road,  
ix. A Narayanpura Main Road,  
x. New Thippasandra Main Road,  
xi. Jogupalya Main Road, and  
xii. Main Channel Road.  
2. Development of Public Transport System:  
a. Metro Phase II: MG Road to Gottigere Link 
b. LRT/ Mono Rail: Trinity to Varthur  
c. LRT/ Mono Rail: Intermediate Ring Road   
3. Development of Intermodal Interchange Stations: Four integrated Intermodal Passenger 
Stations are proposed to be developed for easy of passenger movement and im proved public 
transport efficiency.  
a. Swami Vivekananda Metro Station  
b. Domaluru Interchange  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
3-10 
c. Byapannhalli Metro Station  
d. Proposed World Class Byapanahalli Railway Station  
4. Junction Improvement Programme (JIP): Domlur junction, CMH junction and Baiyapanahalli 
Junction are identified for Junction Geometric Improvement for smoother vehicle 
movements, pedestrian and NMT facilities.    
5. Preparation of Parking Plans for Commercial Areas/ Public Buil dings/ Places: It is proposed 
that a Parking Development and Management Plan be prepared for following commercial 
areas: 
 100 ft road, Indiranagar 
 80 ft road, Indiranagar 
 Thippasandra Market Area 
 New Thippasandra Road (and cross roads)  
 CMH Road 
 Kodihalli Main Road (and cross roads),  
 Dodda Banasawadi Main Road,  
 BEML Main Road/ KH Main Road. 
6. Area Redevelopment: Following areas are proposed to be taken up under Area 
Redevelopment: 
 Bennigana Halli,  
 Nagayana Palya,  
 Sathiya Nagar,  
 Byrasandra,  
 Kaggadasapura,  
 Virabhadra Nagar,  
 BMK Nagar 
7. Preparation of Slum Redevelopment Plan 
8. Lake protection and rejuvenation: It is proposed to prepare lake and lake area development 
plan for following lakes:  
 Melina Kere 
 Kaggadasapura/ Byrasandra Kere,  
 Kelagina Kere,  
 Mahadevpura Kere/ Nakkundi Kere and  
 Vibhutipura Kere (also called L B Sastry Nagar lake) 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
4-1 
4.PD 03: AUSTIN TOWN-KORAMANGALA-HSR LAYOUT 
  
 
1. The Koramangala planning district is located within the inner core of the cit y. The extent 
admeasures 3083.02 ha (30.83 sq km) and comprises of 9 BBMP wards – namely Agaram 
(114), Neelasandra (116), Shanthi Nagar (117), Vannarpet (115) in Bangalore East zone, 
Adugodi (147), Ejipura (148), Koramangala (151), Jakkasandra (173) wards in Bangalo re South 
Zone of the BBMP and HSR Layout (174) falling within the Bommanahalli Zone of the BBMP .  
2. Soŵe ŵajoƌ laŶdŵaƌks aƌe iŶ this PD aƌe HolǇ TƌiŶitǇ ChuƌĐh, JohŶsoŶ Maƌket , St JohŶ͛s 
Hospital, Forum Mall and the Air Force Command Hospital. 
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography 
3. As per Census 2011, PD 3 has 3,80,778 inhabitants, which has increased by 32. 6% from 2001 
(2,87,115) and there are 1,70,995 (44.9%) resident workers. There are 92,825 households 
(2011), with Avg. Household size being 4.10, which is lower than that of the BMA as a whole 
(4.01). 
4. The gross density is 124 persons per hectare (pph), whereas the average residential density is 
508 pph. The gross density is highest in Neelasandra (899 pph), and the least in  Agaram (33 
pph). 
Industry and Commerce 
5. The major employment in the Planning District is commercial - both retail and office space, 
and there are some small clusters of industrial areas in Neelasandra, Shanthi Nagar, Adug odi, 
Ejipura and Koramangala wards. 
Population (2011 Census): 3,80,778 
Area of PD: 3083.02 ha 
Wards in PD: 9 
Gross Density:124PPH 
 
Koramangala planning district (PD 3) is 
located to the south of the Central 
business district of Bangalore. This 
planning district consists predominantly 
of residential areas like Koramangala 
layout and HSR layout, and public – semi 
public / unclassified areas.  
 
The RMP2031 proposes to guide the 
development and redevelopment in the 
area and stabilize the commercialization, 
Environment Protection, Transport 
Integration and Disaster Mitigation.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
4-2 
6. The markets and commercial centres in this PD are Austin Town BDA Complex, Richmond 
Town, Johnson Market, Koramanagala BDA Complex, Sony World Junction, Madivala  Market 
and HSR Layout BDA Complex. The neighbourhood of Koramangala and its sur rounding areas 
have today become a huď iŶ its oǁŶ ƌight as the ŶuĐleus of BaŶgaloƌe͛s staƌt -up community. 
There are several clusters of IT offices centred on these start-ups, especially owing to it s 
proximity to the CBD and Electronic City. The area also houses a very high number of 
restaurants and eateries. Commercial development has come up along several roads in this 
neighbourhood. 
Land Use  
7. The predominant land uses are Public Semi Public-Unclassified and residential use covering 
32.6% and ~23.3 % of area respectively. The Public –semi-public land use zone consisting of 
8.6% area mainly consists of government offices. The area under transportation is ~9.5%. The 
total area under commercial land use is ~5%.  The area under water bodies and streams is  
6.28 % of the total area. Figure 4-1  and Table 4-1  presents the Existing Land U se and Existing 
Land Use Analysis for PD 3.  
Figure 4-1 : PD 3 Existing Land Use Map  
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
4-3 
Table 4-1 : PD 03 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 720.26 23.36 
Commercial 155.09 5.03 
Industrial 34.55 1.12 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 267.52 8.68 
Unclassified 1005.03 32.60 
Public Utility 15.06 0.49 
Parks & Open Spaces 102.58 3.33 
Transport Communication 294.95 9.57 
Vacant 294.32 9.55 
Agriculture 0.00 0.00 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 18.38 0.60 
Water Bodies 175.25 5.68 
Total 3083.00 100.00 
 
Housing and Slums 
8. Residential areas to the north western part of the planning district, including Richmond T own 
and Xavier layout had been developed adjacent to British military bases. To the so uth of this 
PD, Koramangala layout was formed by BDA in the 1960s and consists o f a variety of housing 
types, from dense mixed settlements such as Neelasandra, Ejipura, Adugodi to middle-
income localities to high-end residences and apartment complexes. The southernmost part of  
this planning district, contains a more recent BDA layout – HS‘ LaǇout aŶd it͛s suƌƌouŶdiŶg, 
as well as dense mixed settlements west of Agara Lake. 
9. There are 26 slums in this PD with 57,974 residents (i.e 15% of the total population residin g in 
the PD). Of these slums, 9 slums are notified slums while 17 is a non-notified. 
 
Traffic and Transportation 
10. Traffic congestion is one of the pressing issues of this Planning District; Si lk Board, Madiwala 
Check Post, Ejipura, Shoolay Circle and Sony World Junction – some of the major congested 
junctions, which see traffic congestions.  
11. PD is well-connected by BMTC bus services. The Phase 2 metro running along Hosur Road  and 
Outer Ring Road is expected increase public transport network and reduce the congest ion on 
certain roads. Vellara Junction, Longford Town, Silk Board Metro Station,  HSR Layout (all on 
Hosur Metro Link) and HSR Layout Venkatapura, Agara Lake and Ibblur Stations (all  on ORR) 
are the location for proposed metro stations within this planning district. 
12. Kengal Hanumanthaiah Road (Double Road), much of the Intermediate Ring Road, Hosur  
Road (defining western boundary of PD), Old Airport Road and Richmond Road in  the north, 
Sarjapur Road in the south, Madivala Road, Ganapathi Temple Road, Lower Agaram Road, 
Mother Teressa/ Masjid Road are the major arterial roads that pass through this Plan ning 
District. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
4-4 
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
13. As per BWSSB, the water supply network is ~ 476 km in length, whereas sewerage network 
length is about 352 km. About 41.4% of water connections are metered and 4 1.9% of 
households have sewerage connections.  
14. There are 128 schools and several large institutions such as the National Dairy Research 
Institute, St JohŶ͛s MediĐal College, the NatioŶal Gaŵes Village aŶd eduĐatioŶal iŶ stitutioŶs 
of repute such as Jyoti Nivas College and NIFT present in this PD. The PD has 4 Gov ernment 
Health Centres & Hospitals and 20 private hospitals, with a total of 1678 beds. Promi nent 
hospitals iŶ this PD aƌe the Aiƌ FoƌĐe CoŵŵaŶd Hospital, St JohŶ͛s Hospital aŶd  NaƌaǇaŶa 
Hrudayalaya. 
Park and Open Spaces 
15. There are several neighborhood parks & open spaces in the planned layouts. Prominent parks 
and open spaces being the P oliĐe Paƌk & GƌouŶds iŶ VeŶkatapuƌa, St JohŶ͛s MediĐal College 
and Grounds, Freedom International School Park, Wipro Park, Adugodi Police Grou nd & 
Koramangala Indoor Stadium. 
Heritage and Culture 
16. There are 45 sites of heritage importance; which includes Holy Trinity Church, Elgin Mills, 
Baldwin Boys High School with Lincoln Hall Chapel, Johnson Market, Al l Saints Church, 
Richmond Town Methodist Church, Frank Anthony Junior School, Wesley Tamil Church , 
Cathedƌal High SĐhool, St. PhiloŵeŶa͛s Hospital, St. AŶŶe͛s Giƌls SĐhool, CoŵŵaŶd Hospital 
(Air  Force), Infant Jesus Church and Basavesvara Temple. 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: DECONGESTION, TRANSIT INTEGRATION, REDEVELOPMENT, DISASTER 
MITIGATION 
 
PROPOSALS 
 
1. The governing principal is to stabilize the rapid commercialization of residential  areas in this 
planning district, transport integration, environment protection, and redevelopment an d 
disaster mitigation. The Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use Statement are 
presented in Figure 4-2  and Table 4- 2  respectively.  
2. The RMP2031, acknowledging the fact that several residential neighborhoods within PD have  
been completely transformed into a commercial hub and is leading to c ongestion and 
difficulties to residential areas, proposes stabilizing and restricting further commercial  
developments by defining identified roads on which future commercial activities that can  be 
allowed. Importantly, RMP2031 restricts any form of commercial development on  residential 
roads having road width less than 12.2m. 
3. To improve the public transport share, it is proposed to develop Mono Rail / light rail on the 
intermediate ring road and Old Airport Road. It is proposed to develop statio ns on Mono/ 
Light Rail alignments at EGL Business Park, Ejipura Junction, Sony World Ju nction, 
KoƌaŵaŶgala St JohŶ͛s Auditoƌiuŵ, KoƌaŵaŶgala Wateƌ TaŶk, aŶd St. JohŶs Hospi tal aloŶg 
Intermediate Ring Road and Command Hospital and Domalur (Indian Oil Petrol Pump) .  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
4-5 
4. In order to improve the accessibility to public transport systems (proposed Metro  Stations 
and Mono/ Light Rail Stations), and to have first and last mile connecti vity through walk 
ability/ the Non-motorized transport (NMT) it is proposed to provide NMT/  Pedestrian 
facilities on existing road network leading to stations along the metro and mono/ light rail.  
5. The RMP2031 has identified 6 critical road junctions that require geometric improvements 
for better and smoother traffic flow. They are Shoolay circle junction, Adugodi juncti on road, 
Madivala Checkpost, Silk board junction, Sonyworld junction Koramangala and Eji pura 
junction.  
6. Re-development of areas like Ejipura, Jyoti nivasa, Veerakesari, Shakti Velu Nagar, Maya  
Bazar, Gajendranagar, Lakshman Rao Nagar, J.K.Pura, Thimmarayappa Garden, S.D.S 
Syanitorium is proposed to be taken- up. 
 
Figure 4-2: PD 3 Proposed Land Use Map 
 
 
 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
4-6 
Table 4-2: PD 03 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 912.46 32.60 
Commercial 70.99 2.54 
Industrial 0.00 0.00 
Public & Semi Public 256.54 9.17 
Unclassified 1020.62 36.47 
Public Utility 29.47 1.05 
Parks / open spaces 92.63 3.31 
Transport & Communication 351.56 12.56 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 17.44 0.62 
Water Bodies 140.66 5.03 
NGT Buffer 190.63 6.81 
Total Developable Area 3083.00 110.16 
Agriculture   - 
Total PD Area 3083.00 - 
 
7. The RMP2031 recognizes the present status of slums and potential for in-situ (to  the extent 
possible) Redevelopment of Slums to be taken up.  
8. RMP2031 proposes that BBMP, in accordance to the provisions of Street Vend ing Act, 2015, 
determines the areas/ streets for Informal activities/ Street Vending activities an d prepares 
detailed up gradation plans for such areas/ roads/ streets. 
9. The RMP2031 proposes the protection of catchment, Bellandur Lake, Agara Lake and their  
natural streams. 
10. To improve green cover and provide comfort to pedestrians and improv e street aesthetics, 
the RMP2031 proposes road side and avenue plantation for arterial roads, sub -arterial and 
important roads. 
11. Some parts of Planning District 3 are prone to Urban Flooding while some are as are at fire 
risk. It is proposed that local area disaster and Hazard Mitigation Plan covering asp ects 
related Urban Flooding, Fire, & Emergency Situations be prepared for areas like Koramangala, 
S.T Bed, Neelasandra, Ejipura, Hosur road, Lower Agaram covered by ward number 115, 116,  
149, 151, 173 and 189. 
 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD3: Austin Town - Koramangala  - HSR . 
1. Road Development Plan 
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Catego ry -1 
Roads.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
4-7 
b. Widening of Ejipura Main Road (using defence land), Madiwala Road and Lo wer 
Agaram Road. 
c. Connectivity Improvement Projects: 
i. Development of link from Ejipura Junction (Srinivagilu) to Jakkasandra Cross 
on Sarjapura Road 
d. Overall Geometric Improvement of Certain Roads 
i. Ejipura Main Road (including completion of flyover over railway line),  
ii. Intermediate Ring Road 
iii. Ganapathi Temple Road and Forum Mall and Surrounding Areas 
iv. 1A Cross Road and 5th Cross Road (6th Block Koramangala) 
v. Bazar Street 
vi. Srinivagulu Main Road 
vii. Anjepalya Road 
viii. Lower Agram Road  
ix. Madivala Road  
x. Sarjapura Road 
xi. 27th Main Road HSR Layout 
2. Development of Public Transport System:  
a. Namma Metro:  
i. Hosur Road Link 
ii. Outer Ring Road 
b. LRT / Mono Rail: Intermediate Ring Road  
3. Development of Intermodal Interchange Stations:  
a. Madivala checkpost.  
4. Preparation of Accessibility Improvement Plans . 
5. Junction Improvement Programme (JIP): Critical junctions identified by RMP2031 for 
Junction Improvement Programme include:  
a. Shoolay circle junction,  
b. Adugodi junction road,  
c. Madivala Checkpost,  
d. Silk board junction,  
e. Sony world junction Koramangala  
f. Ejipura junction  
g. Forum Mall Junction  
h. St. John Junction  
i. Koramangala Water Tank  
j. Anepalya Junction  
k. CMP Junction  
l. Eijipura Road and Srinivagulu Main Road T Junction  
6. Preparation of Parking Plans for Commercial Areas/ Public Buil dings/ Places: It is proposed 
that A Parking Development and Management Plan be prepared for following commercial  
areas:  
a. Intermediate ring road 
b. Commercial areas in the HSR Layout. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
4-8 
c. Ganapathi Temple Road and Forum Mall and Surrounding Areas 
d. 1A Cross Road and 5th Cross Road (6th Block Koramangala) 
e. Bazar Street 
f. 27th Main Road HSR 
7. Area/ Slum Redevelopment:  
a. Madivala Market Area Redevelopment 
b. Areas/ slums are proposed to be taken up under Area Redevelopment: 
i. Ejipura  
ii. Jyoti nivasa,  
iii. Veerakesari  
iv. Shakti Velu Nagar  
v. Maya Bazar 
vi. Gajendranagar  
vii. Lakshman Rao Nagar  
viii. J.K.Pura  
ix. Thimmarayappa Garden  
x. S.D.S Syanitorium  
8. Preparation of Slum Redevelopment Plan 
9. Physical Infrastructure 
a. Dry Waste Collection Centre:   18 Nos. 
b. Organic Waste Collection Centre:                02 Nos. 
c. Aggregators:                  01 Nos .  
10. Disaster & Hazard Mitigation Plan:   
a. Urban Flooding Mitigation Plan for Koramangala, S.T Bed, Neelasandra, Ejipura, 
Hosur road, Lower Agaram covered by ward number 115, 116, 149, 151, 173 and  
189.  
b. Development of Mini-Fire Station at Ejipura  
11. Lake protection and rejuvenation: It is proposed to prepare lake and lake area development 
plan for following lakes:  
 Agara Lake 
 Bellandur Lake 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
5-1 
5.PD 04: JAYANAGARA 
 
1. The planning district comprises of 10 wards which include, Sunkenahalli (14 2), 
Visvesvarapuram (143), Siddapura (144), Hombegowda Nagar (145), Lakkasandra (146), 
Sudduguntepalya (152), Jayangar (153), Basavangudi(154), Yadiyuru (167), an d Byrasandra 
(169) and covers parts of West, East and South zone of BBMP.  
2. Some of the important landmarks in the PD are: Lal Bagh, Yadiyur lake, Krishna Rao P ark, Bull 
temple, National College, BMS College, Christ College, Nimhans, Karnataka Milk Fed eration, 
Mico Bosch, Shanti Nagar TTMC, Jayanagar 4th Block Market, Food Street at VV Puram, and 
Gandhi Bazar. 
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography 
3. The PD has a population of 3,46,593 as per census 2011 and has a decadal gro wth rate of 
only 1.2% between the years 2001 and 2011. The PD has a HH size of 4.15 which is higher 
than the BMA average of 4.01. The resident workers in the PD total up to 1,46,270 with a 
workforce participation rate of 42.2% compared to 44.9% within BMA . The ward with the 
highest density is Siddapura (528 pph) and the ward with lowest density is Vi svesvarapuram 
(131 pph). 
 
Industry and Commerce 
4. Commercial land uses account for 11.96% as per Existing Land Use 2015  which is high for an 
area initially planned as predominantly residential layouts. Commercial developm ent is seen 
Population (2011 Census):  3,46,593 
Area of PD: 1481.9 Ha 
Wards in PD:  10 
Gross Density: 234PPH 
 
Jayanagara Planning District 4 is located 
in the core of BMA, to the south of the 
Pete and Shivajinagar and to the west to 
Koramangala. It is popularly known to 
many as the origins of south Bengaluru . 
The Planning District is characterised by 
planned residential areas, education and 
health institu tioŶs, soŵe of the city’s 
major markets, industries, water bodies 
and a hierarchy of large and small open 
spaces.  
 
The PD has undergone transformation in 
its character, from being predominantly a 
residential zone to a mixed use zone.  
This has large number of heritage sites 
which reflects the deep rooted history 
and culture existing within the PD.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
5-2 
along major roads, like KR road, DVG road, RV road, Mariayyapa Road as we ll as traditional 
areas like Gandhi Bazaar which was historically a market street. Traditional residential 
neighbourhoods like Basvangudi and Jayanagar have undergone transformation a s many of 
the residential plots have converted their ground floor spaces into offices and shops, thu s 
showing character of a mixed use zone.  The major employment in the Planning D istrict is 
commercial retail and office spaces.  
5. Industrial land uses account for 4.73%. There are small clusters of industrial areas in Shanti  
nagar, Taverekere, Basavangudi, Thyagarajanagar and Yediyur. There are large industrial 
campuses along Bannerughata and Hosur Roads, housing the offices of Oracle and Mico  
Bosch and Karnat aka Milk FedeƌatioŶ. Tǁo of the ĐitǇ͛s ĐoŵŵeƌĐial huďs, ǁhiĐh attƌaĐt 
shoppers from all parts of South Bangalore: Gandhi Bazaar and Jayanagar 4th Block are 
loĐated heƌe. BaŶgaloƌe͛s oldest full -ledged mall, Forum, is also located in this Planning 
District. Other markets in this PD are VV Puram Market, Chikka Mavalli Market , Chamrajpet 
Market, Lakkasandra Market and Yediyur Market. Several Educational and Health facilities  
are also means of employment with the planning district. 
 
Existing Land Use 
6. Residential continues to be predominant land use (37.7%) within the PD, follow ed by PSP 
(17.34%) and Commercial (11.96%). The Commercial land use substantially higher when 
compared to city average. The presence of several educational and health institutions h as 
also lead to higher share of PSP use.  Figure 5-1  and Table 5-1  present the Existing Land Use 
Map and Existing Land Use Area statement respectively.  
Figure 5-1: PD 4 Existing Land Use Map 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
5-3 
Table 5-1 : PD 04 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 558.75 37.71 
Commercial 177.14 11.95 
Industrial 70.07 4.73 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 257.03 17.34 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 6.62 0.45 
Parks & Open Spaces 119.62 8.07 
Transport Communication 197.21 13.31 
Vacant 65.96 4.45 
Agriculture 0.00 0.00 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 3.24 0.22 
Water Bodies 26.24 1.77 
Total 1481.88 100.00 
 
Housing and Slums 
7. Residential land uses account for 37.71% of total PD area. The Jayanagar PD is f amous for its 
well-planned residential layouts – Basavanagudi, planned in the late 19th century by the 
Wodeyars of Mysore, as an outĐoŵe of the gƌeat plague. JaǇaŶagaƌ, oŶe of Asia͛s laƌgest 
residential extensions then, was established in 1948 to the south-east of Basavanagu di. Later 
layouts were planned as extensions of these two layouts, including Thyagaraja Nagar, N R 
Colony and Wilson Garden. Interspersed with these layouts are urban villages and dense, 
mixed settlements with narrow roads, such as Sudhama Nagar, Saddugunte Palya, 
Byrasandra, Lakkasandra, and Adugodi. The Planning District sees typologies ranging from o ld 
colonial bungalows to middle-class neighbourhoods to high-end apartments to  dense, mixed 
urban village settlements. Land prices in these areas are high owing to location an d high 
accessibility to physical infrastructure and social infrastructure. 
8. There are 34 slums in this PD, located primarily in low-lying areas and adjacent to lake b eds. 
The share of slum population in total population is 13.3% which is residing  in 31 notified 
slums and 3 non-notified slums. 
 
Traffic and Transportation 
9. Transport and Communication land uses account for 13.31% of the existing l and use survey -
2015 within the PD. The PD is well connected by a grid system of parallel an d diagonal roads. 
The circulation within the PD is well defined through a clear hierarchy of roads. K R Road , 
Lalbagh Main Road, Kanakapura Road, Bannerughatta Road and Hosur Road are the majo r 
arterial roads that pass through this Planning District. The critical junctions in this PD 4 are 
Lalbagh Main Gate, Minerva Circle, Adugodi, Dairy Circle and Madiwala Check Po st. The PD is 
well-connected by bus services, and the Shantinagar Bus Depot which serves both inter-stat e 
and local mobility.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
5-4 
10. Phase 1 of the metro, with stations at National College and South End Circle  Metro Station 
under Phase 1 and NIMHANS Metro Station under Phase 2 passes through this PD. 
 
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
11. PD 4 has a water supply line of 420.5 km and a sewerage line of 325.23 km  length. 48.1% of 
households are connected to metered water supply, and 48.5% of households have sewage 
ĐoŶŶeĐtioŶs. Theƌe aƌe ϲ DWCC͛s aŶd a Bio -Methanation Unit within the PD. There is 1 no. of 
existing 220kv sub-station while one 220kv sub-station is under implementation.  
12. There are several schools (163), colleges and hospitals because of which the total PSP landuse 
is higher (about 17.34%). This area is home to several well-known institutions such  as the 
Mahila Seǀa Saŵaj, NatioŶal College, JaiŶ College, VijaǇa College, ‘ V TeaĐheƌ͛s TƌaiŶiŶg 
College, the Dharmaram College, Christ University, the Government Indus- Trai Training 
Institute, the National Institute of Animal Nutrition and Physiology and the National Dairy 
Research Institute. PD 4 also has 9 Government Health Centres & Hospitals and 42 private 
hospitals, with a total of 3473 beds (third highest among all PDs). Prominent h ealthcare 
institutions in this PD are the National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences, the 
Kidǁai Meŵoƌial IŶstitute of OŶĐologǇ, St JohŶ͛s MediĐal College aŶd Hospital  aŶd SaŶjaǇ 
Gandhi Hospital. 
 
Park and Open Spaces 
13. Parks and Open Spaces account for 10.06% of the existing land use within the PD, which is 
due to planned residential extensions/ layouts. Lalbagh is a 200-year o ld lung space and one 
of the largest city level parks/ open spaces. In addition, there are several parks desig ned as 
part of the planned layouts like M N Krishna Rao Park, Tagore Circle, Bugle Rock Park, 
Madhavan Park and the Lakshman Rao Parks along RV Road,etc. The canopy of trees that 
overlook RV Road on either side are also an important part of the heritage of this PD, and 
have been preserved while Metro corridor that runs along road.  
14. Many schools contain playing grounds while most of the temples have op en spaces within 
there premises. Other than these, there are some smaller parks and open spaces located as 
neighborhood parks.  
 
Heritage and Culture 
15. This PD has 81 heritage and cultural sites encompassing built, natural and cultural val ues. The 
PD is characterised by a number of places of worship. Some of the important temple s include 
Bull Temple or Mandhisvara Temple, Mallikarjuna Temple and Boulder Inscriptio n, Sri 
Shankaramath Bhoganandeswara Kalyana Mantapa, Sri Subrahmanya Swami Temple, Sri 
Vasavi Kanyaka Parameshwari Temple, Venkataramanesvami Temple and Ramakrishna Math . 
Other important places of worship include Christ Church, Jamia Masjid.  
16. Important landmarks include Glass House in Lalbagh, Lalbagh Band Stand, Sir Kemp egowda 
Tower, Bugle Rock Park, the East West School and public buildings such as BWSSB Water 
Works Office and Basavanagudi Police Station etc.  
17. There is also non-tangible heritage such as the Kadlekai Parishe (Groundnut Fair), the 
century-old Gandhi Bazaar and the cluster of temples at Sajjan Rao Circle and the famous 
restaurants Mavalli Tiffin Rooms (MTR), Vidyarthi Bhavan, the historic Gokhale Institute of  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
5-5 
Public Affairs, Indian Institute of World Culture and City Institute etc which  is part of the rich 
cultural history of Basavangudi. 
 
Lakes and Drainage 
18. . Yediyuru Lake and Lal Bagh Lake are the important existing lakes.  
 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: STABILISATION, HERITAGE CONSERVATION, TRANSIT 
INTEGRATION AND REDEVELOPMENT  
PROPOSALS 
1. The governing principle for planning for this area is to maintain sanctity o f the residential 
area by stabilizing the commercial activities, improvement of circulation through Tran sit 
Integration, Heritage Conservation and Redevelopment.The RMP2031 acknowledging the  
fact that several residential neighborhoods within PD have been are getting transform ed into 
a commercial hubs and is leading to congestion and difficulties to residential  areas, proposes 
stabilizing and restricting further commercial developments by defining identified  roads on 
which future commercial use is allowed.The Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use 
Statement are presented in Figure 5-2  and Figure 5-3  respectively.  
Figure 5-2: PD 4 Proposed Land Use Map 
 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
5-6 
Table 5-2: PD 04 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 603.56 21.82 
Commercial 103.54 3.74 
Industrial 60.00 2.17 
Public & Semi Public 235.14 8.50 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 5.60 0.20 
Parks / Open Spaces 119.43 4.32 
Transport & Communication 252.65 9.13 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 3.19 0.12 
Water Bodies 25.47 0.92 
NGT Buffer 73.30 2.65 
Total Developable Area 1481.88 53.58 
Agriculture   - 
Total PD Area 1481.88 - 
 
2. To improve the public transport share it is proposed, in addition to already pl anned, existing 
Metro Phase 1 (Green Line) and under implementation Phase 2 Yellow Line  (RV Road to 
Bommasandra) and Red Line (Gottigere – Nagavara), an Mono Rail/ light rail on the 
intermediate ring road is also proposed and is passing through the PD.  
3. The RMP2031 proposes multi modal interchange at Diary Circle (Metro+ M ono/ Light Rail + 
Bus) and Madiwala Check Post (Mono+Bus).  
4. It is proposed that Bannerughatta Road and Hosur Main Road are designed as Signal Free 
Corridors with focus on Pedestrian Safety and development of NMT facilities.  
5. The RMP2031 has identified around 17 road junctions that are to be taken up f or geometric 
improvements for better and smoother traffic flow.  
6. RMP2031 proposes that a detailed parking plan be prepared for Commercial Areas of Wils on 
Garden, Gandhi Bazar, DVS Road/ Puttana Road/ (Basavangudi), Jayanagar 1st Block 
Jayanagar 4th Block, and Jayanagar 5th Block.  
7. To cater to future management and operations of Solid Waste in future, it is proposed that in 
addition to existing facilities, 20 Dry Waste Collection Centres, 3 Organic Waste Collection 
Centres, and 1 waste Aggregator are proposed to be developed within the Planning District 
by BBMP.  
8. Among 12 heritage zones proposed across LPA of BDA, the extents of the third heritage zone, 
Basavangudi and VV Puram Heritage Zone falls within this PD and has been deli neated. 
Basavangudi includes historic areas such as Basavangudi, Lal Bagh, VV Puram, Gav i Puram 
and Bull Temple . Figure 5-3  depicts the extent of Basavangudi Heritage Zone. RMP2031 
proposes to ĐoŶseƌǀe BasǀaŶgudi͛s uŶiƋue ŵoƌphologǇ, soĐio -economic and cultural 
character. Conservation of Basavangudi area is to be guided by zoning regulatio ns and 
heritage guidelines.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
5-7 
Figure 5-3: PD 4 Gavipuram, Basavangudi and VV Puram Heritage Zone 
 
 
9. Re-development of areas like Doddamavalli, Sudhama Nagar, Arekempanahalli (Mav alli), 
Chikku Lakshmaiah Layout, is proposed to be taken-up. RMP2031 proposes rede velopment of 
slums through in-situ (to the extent possibleto be taken up in phased manner. 
10. RMP2031 proposes that BBMP, in accordance with the provisions of Street Vending  Act, 
2015, BBMP shall determine the areas for Informal activities/ Street Vending  and detailed up 
gradation plans for such areas/ roads/ streets are prepared. 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD4: Jayanagar: 
1. Road Development Plan 
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Catego ry -1 
Roads.  
b. Signal Free Corridors 
i. Bannerughatta Road 
ii. Hosur Main Road 
2. Development of Public Transport System 
a. Namma Metro Bannerughatta Link (Red Line) 
b. Mono Rail Link 2: Intermediate Ring Road  
3. Development of Intermodal Stations 
a. Madivala checkpost  

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
5-8 
b. Diary Circle  
4. Accessibility Improvement Plan for station and educational institutions   
5. Junction Improvement Programme (JIP) 
a) Minerva Circle,  
b) Bull Temple Junction,  
c) Sydicate Bank Junction,  
d) Junction of KH Road and H Siddaiah Rd.,  
e) Sagar Apollo Hospital Junction,  
f) Ashram Junction (Bannerughatta Road and Tank Bund Rd Intersection),  
g) Muri Junction,  
h) Kallada Travels Junction (Intersection of Hosur Road and Maruthi Nagar Main Road),  
i) Madiwala Check Post Junction,  
j) St. Johns Hosptial Junction,  
k) Tavarkere Main Road & Hosur Main Road Intersection,  
l) Adugodi Junction,  
m) MICO Signal,  
n) Lal Bagh Main Gate,  
o) Urvarshi Talkies Junction,  
p) Kempegowda Circle,  
q) Basappa Circle.  
6. Preparation of Parking Plans for Commercial Areas/ Public Building s/ Places   
a) Wilson Garden,  
b) Gandhi Bazar,  
c) DVS Road/ Puttana Road/ (Basavangudi),  
d) Jayanagar 1st Block  
e) Jayanagar 4th Block, and  
f) Jayanagar 5th Block.  
7. Area Redevelopment: Following areas/ slums are proposed to be taken up under Area 
Redevelopment: 
a) Doddamavalli,  
b) Sudhama Nagar,  
c) Arekempanahalli (Mavalli),  
d) Chikku Lakshmaiah Layout 
8. Slum Redevelopment Plans 
9. Development of SWM Facilities: 
a) Dry Waste Collection Centre:   20 No. 
b) Organic Waste Collection Centre: 03 No. 
c) Aggregators:   01 No.  
10. Heritage Area Protection and Conservation Scheme:  
a. Heritage Master Plan for Basvangudi Heritage Zone  
b. Heritage Area Improvement and Development scheme  
11. Lake protection and rejuvenation plans : It is proposed to prepare lake and lake area 
development plan for Yediur Lake. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
6-1 
6.PD 05: RAJAJI NAGAR –BAPUJI NAGAR –AZAD 
NAGAR 
 
1. In this PD, there are a total of 23 wards namely - Rajaji Nagar (99), Basaveshwara Nagar (100), 
Dr.Rajkumar Ward (106), Shiva Nagar (107), Sri Rammandira (108), Binnipet (1 21), 
Kempapura Agrahara (122), Maruthi Mandira Ward (126), Padarayanapura (135), 
Jagareevanram Nagar (136), Rayapuram (137), Chalavadipalya (138), Chamarajpete (140 ), 
Azad Nagar (141) in the Bangalore West Zone of the BBMP and Govindraja Nagara (104 ), 
Agrahara Dasarahalli (105), Gali Anjaneya Swamy Temple Ward (157), Vijay Nagar (123 ), 
Hosahalli (124), Marenahalli (125), Attiguppe (132), Hampi Nagar (133), Bapuji Nagar (134 ). 
2. Mysore Road, Magadi Road, Mahakavi Kuvempu/ Dr. DC Modi Road and Chord Road are the 
major roads within the PD and define the spatial structure of PD.  
3. The PD is fully developed and has limited space for growth, and redevelopment of certain 
parts is seen inevitable.  
4. The Rajajinagar Planning District is defined by the industries that were set up – both pre-
independence (such as the Minerva Mills) and the PSUs – in Bangalore. These industrial 
estates, some of which are defunct today, were originally surrounded by settlements of 
workers, both formal and informal, and later by BDA-planned layouts. 
5. The planning district has a number of dense mixed settlements, layouts with well- planned 
grid of roads as well as mixed urban villages and colonies. There are several cultural 
institutions that dot this Planning District, as well as many well-known city-lev el educational 
institutions. Major Landmark within the PD includes PG Institute for Medical Sciences and 
Research, ESI Hospital, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Sports Complex, Planned Residential Layouts like 
Rajajnagar, Hosahalli, RPC Layout, Vijaya Nagar, etc.  
Population (2011 Census): 7,87,560 
Area of PD: 18.06 sq.km (1806.63 ha) 
Wards in PD: 23 
Gross Density (2011 Census): 436 pph 
 
Rajajinagar Planning District 5 is located 
in the core of BMA and west of the 
Central Administrative District (PD1). It 
is characterised by dense residential 
areas as well as mixed use settlements 
and some industrial estates. The PD 
currently is in transition from being 
predominantly a residential to a mixed 
use zone with commercialization seen 
along major roads.  
 
Master Plan aims at stabilising the 
transformation by limiting commercial 
activities to on certain roads and 
planned redevelopment of Industrial 
Area .  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
6-2 
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography 
6. As per Census 2011, PD has 7,87,560 inhabitants, which has increased by 12.2% from 2001 
(7,01,958). There are 1,87,080 households (2011), with an average household si ze of 4.21, 
which is higher than BMA (4.01).  
7. The resident workers in the PD total up to 3,27,597 with a work force participation  of 41.6% 
which is  than lower than the BMA average of 44.5%. Wards namely Rajaji Nagar, 
Dr.Rajkumar, Chalavadipalya and Chamrajpet has seen decreasing densities between census 
year 2001 and 2011, this can be attributed to rapid commercialization seen within these 
wards.  
8. The gross density is highest in Padarayanapura Ward (1213 pph) and lowest in Dr.Rajkum ar 
Ward (244 pph). 
Existing Land Use 
9. Residential is the predominant land use (46% of PD area), followed by Co mmercial Use 
(12.4%) and Industrial 6.1%. The Commercial & Industrial Use as employment centres 
accounts for almost 18.5%. The road network pattern and transport infrastructure already 
realised accounts for 18% of PD area. The parks and open spaces account for merely 4 .1% of 
total area. Figure 6-1  and Table 6-1  presents the existing land use map and existing land use 
statement respectively.  
Figure 6-1: PD 5 Existing Land Use Map 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
6-3 
Table 6-1: PD 05 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 827.80 45.82 
Commercial 225.16 12.46 
Industrial 109.07 6.04 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 99.60 5.51 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 11.06 0.61 
Parks & Open Spaces 74.00 4.10 
Transport Communication 326.59 18.08 
Vacant 120.62 6.68 
Agriculture 0.00 0.00 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 12.72 0.70 
Water Bodies 0.00 0.00 
Total 1806.63 100.00 
 
Industry and Commerce 
10. The eastern part of the Rajajinagar Planning District is located immediately west of the Pete, 
and has a number of dense mixed settlements that surround the older industrial estates such 
as KAVIKA, Binny Mills, Minerva Mills and BHEL. To the west of these areas, Rajajinagar 
Industrial Town and Rajajinagar Industrial Suburb were started in 1960. These gave rise to 
smaller industrial estates around Chord Road and Magadi Road, and their accompany ing 
settlements of industrial workers. Some of the factories are situated in Basaveshwarnagar, 
Vijaynagar, Guddahalli and Chamrajpete. 
11. Commercial land uses account for 12.82% as per existing land use 2015 which is relatively 
high for an area whose character was predominantly residential. Commercial activities in the  
form of both retail and office space is seen mainly along major roads like Magadi  Road, 
Basveshwara Layout 1st Main and 2nd Cross Roads, Dr. RajKumar Road, RajajiNagar 10th and 
12th Main Roads. Some markets in this PD are Vijayanagar BDA Complex, Mosque Road 
market and Chamarajapete Market. 
Housing and Slums 
12. Residential land uses account for 45.81% as per existing land use 2015. The housing typology 
is mainly low rise-high density. West of Chord Road Layout, Rajajinagar, Basaveshwaranag ar 
and Vijayanagar are some of the BDA-planned layouts of this planning district, which have a 
well-planned grid of roads and a large number of parks and playgrounds. Together wi th these 
are some notable private layouts that share these facilities, such as Srirampuram, RPC Layout, 
GKW Layout, and Vinayaka Layout. There are also settlements of urban villages and co lonies 
such as Bapuji Nagar, Kempapura Agrahara, Byatarayanapura, Mariyappana palya 
Guddadahalli and Rayapuram that have considerable commercial mixed uses. 
13. There are 36 slums in the PD out of which only 15 are notified. Chalavadi palya ward, with 6 
slums, has the maximum number of slums.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
6-4 
Transportation 
14. Transport and Communication land uses account for 18.08 % as per existing land use 2015.  
Avenue Road, Magadi Road, Chord Road, Police Road (Beli Mut Road) and Bhash yam Road 
are the major arterial roads passing through this Planning District area. The Bangalo re-
Mysore Railway line also passes through the planning district. 
15. Metro Phase 1 alignment also passes through the PD with five stations: Magadi  Road, 
Hosahalli Metro Station, Vijaynagar Metro Station, Attiguppe Metro Station and D eepanjali 
Nagar Metro Station. Area is also well-connected by bus services. The Satell ite Bus Stand on 
Mysore Road is located in this PD.  
 
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
16. As per BWSSB, 639.1km of piped water supply length and 534.8km of sewerage len gth has 
been established. Also, around 42.5% of households are connected by m etered water supply, 
and 24.8% of households have sewerage connections. Two ground level re servoirs exist at 
Magadi Road and JJR Nagara with capacities of 9 ML and 2.27 ML respectively  while Pumping 
stations exist within the core area at Chamrajpet (60 HP), JJ Nagar (60), Hosa halli (240 HP) 
and Magadi road (50 HP). A sewage treatment plant exists at N.R. Colony with a cap acity of 1 
MLD. There are 18 existing dry waste collection centres.  
17. There are 370 schools. This area is home to several well-known institutions such as the 
Government College of Arts and Commerce, the KLE Law College, the Government Ayurvedic 
Medical College, the Government Homeopathic College, the National Academy for Learning  
and the National Public School Rajajinagar. PD 5 also has 11 Government Health  Centres & 
Hospitals and 45 private hospitals, with a total of 2113 beds. 
18. There are two fire stations, 1 no of 220kv sub-station, 18 DWCCs and 1 Bio-methanation unit.  
 
Lakes and Drainage 
19. The river Vrishabhavathy flows through this Planning district and some neig hbourhoods are 
built on gently sloping terrains of the valley. There were 18 lakes/ kere earlier b ut all of them 
have been lost breached due to urbanisation. 
20. There are numerous low-lying areas, particularly along the Vrishabhavathi River, west o f 
Majestic and north-west of Kempambudhi Lake (area south of Byataranapura and south of 
Bapujinagar), which is south of this Planning District. Area next to the Net aji Subash Chandra 
Bose Stadium (west of Rajajinagar), Shankarappa Garden (north of Magadi Road), 2 locations 
at old Gudadahalli, one at south of Binny Mills and the other south of Ho sahalli road and at 
Kasturba nagar. 
 
Parks and Open Spaces 
21. There are several open spaces and playgrounds in this planning district, notably Dr  B.R 
Ambedkar Sports Complex, Rajajinagar Recreation Association and Netaji Subhash Chandra 
Bose Stadium. In addition to the above, there are also several neighbourhood parks in this 
PD. 
Heritage and Culture 
22. There are a total of 13 sites of heritage value, out of which 9 are public buildin gs. The Tippu 
SultaŶ͛s Suŵŵeƌ PalaĐe ǁhiĐh is aŶ ASI heƌitage site aŶd a ŵajoƌ laŶdŵaƌk iŶ the Đit Ǉ is 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
6-5 
located in the south-western part of the Planning District. Other important heritage si tes 
iŶĐlude The BaŶgaloƌe CitǇ Coopeƌatiǀe BaŶk, Sƌi ChaŵaƌajeŶdƌa SaŶskƌit College, St. L uke͛s 
Church (CSI), Sri Rameshwara Temple and the St. Thomas Church. 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: STABILISATION, TRANSIT INTEGRATION, REDEVELOPMENT AND 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION  
PROPOSALS 
 
1. The Governing Principals for preparation of proposals for this planning district is to stabiliz e 
commercialization of the residential areas, promotion/ integration of public transportation, 
redevelopment of Industrial Areas and prevention of urban flooding .  The Proposed Land Use 
Map and Proposed Land Use Analysis for PD 5 is shown in Figure 6-2 and Table 6-2 
Figure 6-2: PD 5 Proposed Land Use Map 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
6-6 
Table 6-2: PD 05 Proposed Land Use Area Statement  
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 950.20 23.93 
Commercial 79.92 2.01 
Industrial 80.17 2.02 
Public & Semi Public 86.61 2.18 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 10.61 0.27 
Parks / open spaces 58.92 1.48 
Transport & Communication 362.83 9.14 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 0.07 0.00 
Water Bodies 0.00 0.00 
NGT Buffer 177.31 4.46 
Total Developable Area 1806.63 45.49 
Agriculture   - 
Total PD Area 1806.63 - 
 
2. The City level public transport infrastructure LRT/Mono Rail/ BRT along Magad i Road and 
Intermediare Riing Road are proposed to be developed:  
a. Mono/ LRT/ BRT Magadi Road Alignment: The Magadi Road alignment is proposed to 
be developed starting from Magadi Road Metro Station and run along the Magadi 
Road till Seegehalli (LPA limit). It is proposed to develop stations at Ag rahara 
Dasarahalli (Jai Muni Gate), KHB Bus Station (to be planned as inter change wi th 
Mono Rail at the intersection with 80ft ring road), Traffic Police Station 
Kamakshipalya .  
b. Mono/LRT/BRT: intermediate ring road is passing through the PD  
3. Intermodal Interchange Stations are proposed to be developed at 2 locations – a) KSRTC 
Mys ore Road Satellite Bus Station, and b) Deepanjali Metro Station or Vijayanagar Metr o, 
KHB Bus Station .  
4. It is proposed to develop bus shelters at various locations within the plannin g district – some 
of important roads identified include in Vijayanagara Pipe Line, J.P.Park - towards Magadi and 
J.J.R. Nagar, near Devaraja Urs Nagar.  
5. Towards connectivity improvement it is proposed to strengthen the existing network by  
widening five selected roads in entire PD.  
6. To improve the accessibility to Public Transport Stations (Metro, Mono, BM TC Bus Stations, 
Educational Institutes) it is proposed to strengthen the existing road network by providing 
(wherever feasible) footpaths and cycle tracks.  
7. RMP2031 proposes that a detailed parking plan  for Commercial Areas of 3rd, and 5th Block, 
Rajajinagar, Hosahalli Main Road, Chowdappa Main Road, Old Guddadahalli Road (vinay ak 
nagar), Binnepette, Rayapuram - Padarayana Pura, 1st Cross Road and 1st Main Road of 
Basaveshwar Nagar.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
6-7 
8. To cater to future management and operations of Solid Waste in future, it is proposed that in 
addition to existing facilities, 46 Dry Waste Collection Centres, 7 Organic Waste Collection 
Centres, and 1 waste Aggregator are proposed to be developed within the Planning District 
by BBMP.  
9. The Vrishvabhavathi River which flows through the PD is in a state of decay and pollution. 
The RMP2031 proposes the rejuvenation of the Vrishvabhavathi Rive. Towards this i t is 
proposed that Vrushabhavathi Rejuvanation Plan is to be prepared. The basic objective  is to 
stop the indiscriminate sewage/ industrial effluent inflow and disposal of solid waste into the 
river and establishing STPs enabling clear water flow, treatment of stream/ river ban k to 
enhance aesthetics (by greening/ embankment treatment), desilting, etc.  
10. There are several densely congested areas and slums that require upgradation/ 
redevelopment. The RMP2031 proposes that such areas be taken up for upgradation o f 
infrastructure/ redevelopment. The RMP2031 has identified following areas for 
redevelopment: 
 Pipeline Road Surrounding Areas: Areas along Pipe Line Road are very densely  built and 
at certain locations existing Nalla has been breached. The buildings along the  pipeline 
road are G+1 to 3 in height with commercial and industrial establishments on the ground 
floor while residences are seen in the upper floors. The width of Pipeline road varies and 
is 7mts at certain locations. Further, the area is at risk during fire. It is therefore proposed 
to prepare a area redevelopment plan for providing/ upgrading the infrastructure an d to 
achieve uniform road width of 12m for pipeline road. 
 Binnipette, Kempapura Agrahara and Vijaynagara (Part) Wards: Historic mills in 
Binnipette are undergoing transformation from industrial to residential develop ment, 
while the surrounding densely populated residential areas continue to struggle wit h 
infrastructure and facilities. The gross density in Kempapura Agrahara ward is 1112 pph 
as per Census 2011, which is the highest in BBMP. The ward is facing serious issues 
related to solid waste management and lack of parking facilities. The RMP2031 therefor e 
proposes preparation of redevelopment plans for Binnipette ward, Kempapura 
Agarahara ward and the southern portion of Magadi road within Vijaynagara ward. The 
redevelopment plan is to be prepared.  
 Existing Industrial Areas: The Rajaji Nagar Industrial area and industries along Mysore 
road are experiencing changes in activity and gentrification with the influence of the 
metro and higher land prices. It is likely that these areas may evolve in to commercial and 
residential areas. In order to protect facilitate the changeover in the planned manner; the 
RMP2031 proposes redevelopment of such industrial areas in a guided way. Any 
industrial area can be taken up for redevelopment as per the provisions of Zoning 
Regulations.  
 Slum Redevelopment: Chalavadipalya ward has a gross density of 620 pph and Ou t of 36 
slums in PD, 6 slums located within this ward with narrow streets and limited drai nage 
facilities. The RMP2031 proposes redevelopment of slums through in-situ (to the extent 
possible with provision of infrastructure facilities. 
11. There are 13 heritage sites within this PD. Some are part of Pette Heritage Zone while so me 
are independent of any heritage zone. RMP2031 proposes that these buildings be pres erved 
and conserved, while allowing the adaptive uses.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
6-8 
Figure 6-3: PD 5 Extent of Pete Heritage Zone 
 
 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD5: Rajaji Nagar – Binny Pete 
 
1. Road development Plan 
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Categor y -1 
Roads.  
b. Road Widening Projects 
 Hosahalli Main Road (18m) connecting Tank Bund Road to Pipe Line Road 
 Vatala Nagaraj Road (18m) connecting Okalipuram to Chord Road 
 Pipeline Road (12m) 
 10th main and 5th main (12m) connecting to Magadi Road   
 14th cross road (12m) connecting Hosahalli Main Road and Magadi Road 
c. Junction Improvement Programme: The junctions identified for improvement are:  
 On Mysore Road: 
 Sirsi Circle 
 Jadeedh Eidgah Junction (Old Guddadahalli Road) 
 Ashwathkatte Main Road Junction (Azad Nagar, Near Shell Petrol 
Pump)  
 Guddadahalli Junction (4th Cross Road) 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
6-9 
 Redevelopment of Bapujinagar Junction/ Flyover 
 Deepanjali Nagar Bus Depot Junction (Junction of Chord Road and 
Mysore Road) 
 On Chord Road 
 Attiguppe Junction (intersection of 13th Main and 4th Cross Road) 
 Income Tax Layout Cross  
 Vijayanagar TTMC (22nd Main & 5th Main Road) 
 Vijayanagar Traffic Signal  
 Manu Vana Vijaya Nagar (Hosahalli Metro Station) 
 Magadi Road Toll Gate Junction 
 Rajaji Nagar Industrial Area (Near National Public School RNR 1st 
Main Road) 
 Manjunatha Nagar Junction (6th Cross) 
 Star Circle  
 Iskcon Temple Junction 
 On Magadi Road 
 Magadi Road 5th Cross 
 Intersection with Dr. Rajkumar Road 
 Jai Muni Circle 
 KHB Colony Junction (80ft Ring Road) 
 Other Junctions within PD 
 Navarang Circle 
 Modi Hospital Junciton (Thimmaiah Road)  
 Pushpanjali Talkies Junction (60ft road) 
 Shankar Mutt Chowk 
 Basaveshwara Nagar CircleBashyam Circle 
 Havanur Circle 
 Ganapthi Circle 
2. Development of Public Transport System 
a. LRT/ Mono Rail on Intermediate Ring Road  
b. LRT/ Mono Rail on Magadi Road 
3. Development of Intermodal Stations 
a) KSRTC Mysore Road Satellite Bus Station (Bus+Mono+IPT), and  
b) Deepanjali Metro Station (Metro+Mono+IPT) or Vijayanagar Metro (Metro+Mono+IPT) 
depending on the feasibility 
4. Accessibility Improvement Plans for metro and LRT/Mono Rail/ BRT s tations  
5. Preparation of Parking Plans for Commercial Areas/ Public Building s/ Places  
a) 3rd, and 5th Block, Rajajinagar,  
b) Hosahalli Main Road,  
c) Chowdappa Main Road,  
d) Old Guddadahalli Road (vinayak nagar),  
e) Binny Pete,  
f) Rayapuram - Padarayana Pura,  
g) 1st Cross Road and 1st Main Road of Basaveshwar Nagar.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
6-10 
6. Lake and Stream Rejuvenation  Plan:  Rejuvenation of Vrishvabhavathy River 
7. Area Redevelopment:  
 Pipeline road and adjoining development 
 Giripuram area located within Chalavadipalya ward 
 Binnipette ward, Kempapura Agarahara ward and the southern portion of Magadi road 
within Vijaynagara ward 
8. Preparation of Slum Redevelopment 
9. Development of Physical Infrastructure 
d) Dry Waste Collection Centre:   46 No. 
e) Organic Waste Collection Centre: 07 No. 
f) Aggregators:   01 No.  
10. Heritage Area Protection and Conservation Scheme 
a. Heritage Master Plan for Pete Heritage Zone  
b. Heritage Area Improvement and Development scheme  
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
7-1 
7.PD 06: YESHWANTPUR – MALLESWARAM 
  
1. The Yeshwanthpur Malleshwaram Planning District predominantly is within the core area  
(Planning Zone A). It extends from Malleshwaram to Yeswantpur/ HMT area and admeasures 
2774.3 ha (27.74 sq km). It comprises of 16 BBMP wards – namely Aramane Nagar (35), 
Mathik- ere (36), Nandini Layout (43), Marappana Palya (44), Malleshwaram(45), Rajam ahal 
(64), Kadumalleshwara (65), Subramanya Nagar(66), Nagapura(67), Mahalakshmipuram(68), 
Datathreya Temple(77) in the Bangalore West Zone of the BBMP and Jalahalli (16), J.P.Park 
(17), Yeshwanthpur (37), H.M.T (38), Lakshmidevi Nagar (42) in the Raja- rajeshwari Nagar  
Zone of the BBMP .  
2. Landmark cultural institutions such as the iconic Chowdiah Memorial Hall, the Iskcon Temple,  
the Bangalore Place, the educational institutions like Indian Institute of Science, Indian 
Institute of Wood Science; Industrial area of Yeswantpur and Part of Peenya Industrial Area, 
Sandal Soap factory; traditional Malleshwaram market to modern shopping experience -  
Orion Mall, Residential areas like Nandini Layout, Jalahalli, Malleshwaram, Ashwat h Nagar, 
and Large open spaces like Place Grounds and JP Park defines the vibrant characteristics of 
Yeswantpur – Malleshwaram Planning District.  
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography 
3. As per Census 2011, PD has 6,21,302 inhabitants, which is has increased by 1 6.11% from 
2001 (5,35,110) and there are 2,71,135 (43.6%) resident workers. There are 1,57 ,878 
households (2011), with Avg. Household size being 3.94, which is lower than B MA (4.01).  
Population (2011 Census): 621302 
Area of PD: 2774.3 ha 
Wards in PD: 16 
Gross Density (2015): 223PPH 
 
Yeshwantpur – Malleshwaram planning 
district (PD 6) is located in the core of 
BMA and predominantly consists of 
residential areas like Malleshwaram and 
Nandini layout; public – semi public and 
areas under 
transportation/communication including 
Yeshwantpur Railway Station. 
 
The RMP2031 proposes to guide the 
development and redevelopment in the 
area and stabilize the commercialization, 
Transport Integration, and 
redevelopment.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
7-2 
4. The gross density is 178 persons per hectare (pph), whereas the average residential density is 
596 pph. The gross density is highest in Yeshwanthpur ward (527 pph) and the least in  
Aramane Nagar ward (49 pph).  
Industry and Commerce 
5. Large industrial units, including pre-independence units such as the Government Soap  
Factory & Mysore Breweries; PSUs such as BEL, HMT, BHEL and CMTI and later industria l 
areas set up by the govt. such as Yeshwanthpur Industrial Suburb and Peenya Industrial 
Suburb for small & medium scale industries are present in this PD and is major empl oyment 
Centre.  
6. The commercial areas are primarily along the roads, and specifically in Yeshwanthpur Market, 
Yeshwanthpura APMC Yard, Malleshwaram Market, 18th cross market, Malleshwaram 
Sampige Road Market and RC Puram. Metro Cash and Carry has been operational h ere for 
nearly a decade, and more recently, the first large mall in North Bengaluru, Orion Mall , was 
opened Major employment centres like Peenya Industrial Area, Yeshwanthpur Indus- trial 
Area, Malleshwaram, several offices & commercial establishments and Educational institutes  
like IISC, MS Ramaiah Collage and several educational (primary, secondary & higher  
secondary) institutes are providing employment in these PD. 
Land Use  
7. The predominant land uses are Residential (29.97 %), Public/ Semi Public (1 4.03 %) and 
Industrial use with 12.12 % under industries, while the commercial area constitutes aroun d 
7.5 % of the total area in this PD.  It is important note here that combined Industrial Use and 
Commercial use constitute ~20% of the total PD area, which clearly indicates that PD  is major 
employment centre in Bengaluru along with PD 1, PD 3 etc. Figure 7-1 and The Table 7- 1 
presents the existing land use map and existing land use area statement for PD 6.  
Table 7-1: PD 06 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 1043.88 29.97 
Commercial 261.36 7.50 
Industrial 422.28 12.12 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 488.85 14.03 
Unclassified 133.84 3.84 
Public Utility 35.04 1.01 
Parks & Open Spaces 297.12 8.53 
Transport Communication 497.95 14.30 
Vacant 271.59 7.80 
Agriculture 0.00 0.00 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 7.11 0.20 
Water Bodies 24.05 0.69 
Total 3483.08 100.00 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
7-3 
Figure 7-1: PD 6 Existing Land Use Map  
 
 
Housing and Slums 
8. The Planning District is characterized by planned residential - the oldest being Malleswara m 
which – like its counterpart south of the Pete, Basavanagudi – was planned after the great 
plague in the 19th century. Malleshwaram, named derived from the Kaadu Malleshwara 
(Shiva) temple, is essence of Bengaluru from history to modernity.  
9. Other layouts planned in this planning district are Srirampuram, Mathikere, part  of 
Rajajinagar, part of Basaveshwaranagar, Nandini Layout, Mahalakshmipuram, 
Saraswathipuram, RMV Extension, Jalahalli, Yeshwanthpur, Mahalakshmi Layout and 
Vyalikaval. There are several high rise apartments dotting the skyline in a predom inantly low 
rise development.  
10. There are 47 slums in this PD and of which 26 slums are notified slums while  rest are non-
notified. As per census 2011, Slum Population constitutes 10% of total resident s in planning 
district.  
Traffic and Transportation 
11. Tumukur Road, 100 Feet Ring Road, CV Raman Road, MS Ramaiah Road, Chord Road , 
Chowdaiah Road (Sankey Road), Dr.Rajkumar Road, Margosa Road, Watch Factory Road, 
Subroto Mukerjee Road, Sheshadripuram Main Road and Link Road, are major roads wi thin 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
7-4 
the planning district.  Some of the major junctions include Mekhri Circle, WM.S. Ramaiah 
Hospital Junction, Gorguntepalya, Chord road, Tumkuru Road Junction. Bengaluru – Mumbai/ 
New Delhi railway passes through the planning district with Yeshwanthpur Railway Station 
and Malleshwaram Railway Station being located on the railway line. With Metro & BMTC 
bus services available this area offers good public transport options to commuters.  
12. Metro Purple line (Majestic/ City Railway Station to Nagasandra on Tumukuru Ro ad) passes 
through the PD with 8 Metro stations, namely - Jalahalli, Peenya Industrial Area, Peen ya, 
Yeshwanthpur Industrial Area, Yeshwanthpur, Sandal Soap Factory, Mahalaxmi, and 
Rajajinagar, providing access to mass transport. There are Two Depots, namely the 
Yeshwanthpur Bus Depot and Basaveswara KSRTC Bus Stop. 
13. APMC Yard at Yashwantpur is largest in Karnataka, is the place from where most of cities  
food requirements are met. APMC yard attracts thousands of trucks/ lorries from across the 
country and provides employment to thousands of people. There are plans to shift the APMC 
yard to Dasanapura. 
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
14. As per BWSSB, the water supply network is ~ 689 km in length, whereas sewerage network 
length is about 518 km. About 40.5% of water connections are metered and 4 1% of 
households have sanitation connections. It is estimated that around 435 MT/d ay of Solid 
Waste is generated in this PD based on 2011 population.  
15. There are around 263 schools and number of educational and research institutions such as 
the IISC, the Maharani Lakshmi Ammanni College, the National Tuberculosis Institute, the 
National Institute of Advanced Studies, National Academy of Customs, Excise and Narcotic s 
and the Central Manufacturing Technology Institute etc. Further, 5 Government Health 
Centres & Hospitals and 55 private hospitals, with a total of 3156 beds are present, which is 
more than adequate for the present population. 
Lakes & Drainage 
16. Sankey Tank, J P Park (Mathikere) Lake and Palace Ground Lake are the lakes presen t in this 
PD. However, except for Sankey Tank other tanks have been completely br eached. JP Park 
was earlier Mathikere (falling in four revenue village namely Mathikere, Yeshwanthapura, 
Jalahalli, Thanneeranahalli) is fully developed as Large Park providing m uch needed open 
space in the city.  
17. Sampangiram Nagar, Sanjay Gandhi Nagar, Yeshwanthpur Railway Station, KEB Compound 
Mathikere, Brindavanagar (below Mathikere Tank Market) and Meikri Circle are flood prone 
areas as per KSNDMC. Other areas like Industrial worker colony, SBM Layout, Sanjee vappa 
Colony and Slum near Nandini Layout are low lying areas. 
Park and Open Spaces 
18. Owing to the fact that PD consists of many planned layouts & large educational and defen ce 
campuses, it is rich is open spaces & tree cover. There are many charming tree-lin ed avenues 
that invoke the iconic old Bengaluru, the Garden City theme. Major parks includes J P Park, 
Nandini Layout Central & Other Parks, Palace Ground Multipurpose Ground, K empegowda 
Tower Park, Raman Maharishi Park, Sadashivnagar Park, Sankey Tank Park, Jubliee Park 
(within IISC), Pollution Control Ecological Park, HMT Park and others. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
7-5 
Heritage and Culture 
19. There are around 35 sites with heritage value. Some prominent sites are religious centres  
suĐh as St. Peteƌ͛s PoŶiiĐal SeŵiŶaƌǇ, Kadu Malleshǁaƌaŵ Shiǀa Teŵple, KaŶŶika 
Parameshwari Temple, Gangamma Temple and Sri Yadugiri Yathiraja Mut etc.; in stitutions 
such as, the building of the Forest Research Laboratory, the office of the Department of 
IŶfoƌŵatioŶ aŶd PuďliĐitǇ aŶd the GoǀeƌŶŵeŶt WoŵeŶ͛s College as ǁell as sites of h istoƌiĐal 
interest such as the Bangalore Palace, one of the four Kempegowda Towers, Poi Pai House ( 
adaptive re-use of old bungalow to a heritage hotel) & the residence of renowned scientist, 
the Sir CV Raman. 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: ECONOMIC GROWTH, MULTIMODAL INTEGRATION & NETWORK 
IMPROVEMENT, REDEVELOPMENT AND HERITAGE CONSERVATION 
 
PROPOSALS 
1. Economic Growth through Redevelopment of Industrial and Slum Areas along with 
streamlined commercial activities and multimodal integration are the guiding p rinciples for 
RMP2031 Proposals for this planning district. Figure 7-2  presents the Proposed Land Use 
Plan, whereas Table 7-2  presents the proposed land use distribution.  
2. To promote the economic growth and allow for redevelopment, the RMP2031 proposes 
redevelopment of Yeshwanthpur Industrial Areas, Yeshwanthpur Industrial Suburb, Raja 
Industrial Estate, APMC Yard and surrounding densely populated areas. The objectiv e of area 
redevelopment is to employment generation, provision of physical and social infrastructure, 
provision of affordable housing, Master plan circulation network  impr ovement, and creation 
of city level facilities (indicative list includes - park, multi-modal passenger transi t station, 
sports complex, exhibition centres, trade & commerce centre, etc). The Redevelopment  be  
done in line with the provisions of zoning regulations.  
a. Clearly Demarcating the Commercial Use Zone: RMP2031 has defined the extent of 
commercial use zone wherein the commercial activities would be permitted and 
restricting the commercialization of rest of residential areas.  
b. Redevelopment of Streets for provision of Street Vending Activities, Pedestrian 
Facilities: several streets in Malleshwaram witness street vending activities – which is 
a major informal/ self-employment centre in the city. It is therefore proposed  that 
BBMP takes up the redevelopment of local streets (main/ cross roads) for pro visions 
of street vending and pedestrian facilities.  
c. Preparation of Parking Plan for Commercial Areas of Malleshwaram and Traffic 
Circulation Plan: The RMP2031 proposes that a detailed parking plan cove ring 
Margosa Road, Sampige Road, Cross Roads and Main Roads be prepared. Also the 
possibility of development of underground/ Multi-level parking be explored.  
d. Heritage Master Plan and Protection and Conservation of Heritage of Malleshw aram: 
The RMP2031 has delineated the Malleshwaram Heritage Zone, with 2 Heritage 
precincts within. Figure 7-3 and Figure 7-4 presents the Heritage Zones and precinct. 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
7-6 
Figure 7-2: PD 6 Proposed Land Use Map 
 
Table 7-2: PD 06 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 1225.31 31.68 
Commercial 163.93 4.24 
Industrial 429.21 11.10 
Public & Semi Public 444.97 11.51 
Unclassified 143.46 3.71 
Public Utility 35.14 0.91 
Parks / Open Spaces 260.86 6.75 
Transport & Communication 579.47 14.98 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 0.00 0.00 
Water Bodies 0.00 0.00 
NGT Buffer 200.73 5.19 
Total Developable Area 3483.08 90.06 
Agriculture   - 
Total PD Area 3483.08 - 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
7-7 
3. The RMP2031 recognizing the historic, economic and associational value of Malleshwaram, 
makes following proposals for Malleshwaram area: 
4. In addition to Malleshwaram Heritage Zone in this PD, the RMP2031 has identified the 
Bangalore Palace heritage Zone. Figure 7-5 presents the Bangalore Palace Heritage Zone  
Figure 7-3: PD 6 Proposed Malleshwaram Heritage Zone 
 
Figure 7-4: PD 6: Proposed CV Raman House Heritage Zone 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
7-8 
Figure 7-5: PD 6 Bangalore Palace Heritage Zone 
 
 
5. RMP2031 proposes that BBMP, in accordance with the provisions of Street Vending  Act, 
2015, determines the areas/ streets within Malleshwaram, Sehsadripuram, Yeshwanthpur, 
and Mathikere for informal activities/ street vending. Detailed upgradation plans for such 
areas/ roads/ streets are proposed to be prepared. 
6. In addition to the existing Namma Metro System, to augment the public transport share, the 
RMP2031 proposes the following Public Transport Sytems: 
a. Commuter Rail Service (CRS) from Yashwanthpur: The RMP2031 proposes that CRS at 
regional level shall start/ terminate at the Yeshwanthpur Railway Station and 
integrated with city public transport network (Metro/ mono/ Bus).  
b. Metro Rail ORR Link: It is proposed to develop metro link along Outer Ring Ro ad and 
with 5 stations within this PD – namely Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose Circle 
(Kanteerava Studio), Peenya CMIT Metro Station (Interchange), Jalahalli Village Main 
Road ORR Junction (Sharadhamba Nagar) and BEL Circle. Leading to Lottegollahalli 
Railway Station in PD 8.  
c. Mono Rail along Intermediate Ring Road: The Mono Rail on Intermediate Ring Road is 
proposed to be developed along with stations at Shankar Mutt Bus Stop, Geleyara 
Balaga AGB Layout, Mahalakshmi Layout Cross, Mahalakshmi Layout, Shankar Nagar, 
Karnataka Cancer Hospital, MEI Guragunte Palya, Yeshwanthpura Railway Station, 
Yeshwanthpura Circle, IISC, Sadashiva Nagar, Mekhri Circle (inter change with LRT)  
d. LRT / Mono Rail/ BRT along Cubban Park to Jakkur: The LRT/ Mono Rail / BRT starts 
from Cubbon Park Metro stations and runs along Bellary road till Jakkur. Within thi s 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
7-9 
PD it is proposed to develop stations at Palace High Ground, BDA Office, Guttahalli, 
Cauvery Theatre, and Mekhri Circle.  
7. Intermodal Interchang Stations are proposed to be developed at 2 locations  – a) 
Yeshwanthpur Railway Station , and b) Mekhri Circle. 
8. Transit Oriented Development Zone is proposed to be applicable around all metro/ Mono Rail 
stations/ terminals/ interchanges located beyond ORR i.e in Planning Zone B.  
9. To improve the accessibility to Public Transport Stations (Metro, LRT/ Mo no Rail, BMTC Bus 
Stations) and Educational Institutes, it is proposed to strengthen the existing road net work by 
providing (wherever feasible) footpaths and cycle tracks.  
10. The RMP2031 has identified 23 critical junctions for geometric improvements f or better and 
smoother traffic flow and to be taken up on priority.  
11. To cater to future management and operations of Solid Waste, it is proposed to devel op 31 
Dry Waste Collection Centres, 4 Organic Waste Collection Centres, and 1 waste Aggregator in  
addition to existing SWM facilities within the Planning District by BBMP. 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for P.D 6: Yeshwanthpur. 
1. Road development Plan 
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Category - 1 
Roads.  
b. Junction Improvement Plan 
i. Jalahalli Cross, 
ii. Jalahalli Police Station Junction, 
iii. Yeshwanthpur Circle,  
iv. Yeshwanthapura Market, 
v. BEL Junction,  
vi. CS Gorguntepalya junction,  
vii. MEI Guragunte Palya, 
viii. Kanteerva Studio,  
ix. M.S. Ramaiah Hospital Junction,  
x. Mekheri Circle, 
xi. Sadasiva Nagar Police Station Junction, 
xii. Training Command Air Force Gate Junction, 
xiii. Ashwath Nagar Bhupasandra Junction, 
xiv. Surana College - Peenya Campus Junction, 
xv. Gangamma Circle, 
xvi. BEL Market Junction,  
xvii. Intersection of BEL Road and Ramachandrapura Road, 
xviii. Intersection of Mathikere Main Road and Govindappa Road, 
xix. Intersection of MEI Road and Kanteerava Studio Road, 
xx. Intersection of BKNagar Main Road and Pipeline Road (Near Yashwanthpur 
Market), 
xxi. Intersection of Link Road and 5th Cross Road Malleshwaram, 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
7-10 
xxii. Suguma Travels Junction (Dr. Rajkumar road), and 
xxiii. Dattatreya Temple Junction (Malleshwaram) 
2. Development of Public Transport System 
a. Metro along ORR 
b. LRT/ Mono Rail: Intermediate Ring Road  
c. LRT/ Mono Rail : Cubbon Park to Jakkur 
3. Development of Intermodal Stations 
a) Yeshwanthpur and  
b) Mekhri Circle  
4. Accessibility Improvement Plans for stations and educational insitutio ns 
5. Preparation of Parking Plans for Commercial Areas/ Streets falling wi thin 
a) Malleshwaram 
b) Mathikere  
c) Yeshwanthpur 
6. Preparation of Comprehensive Area Redevelopment Plans 
a) Yeshwantpur Industrial Area and Adjoining Densely Populated Areas  
b) Yeshwanthpur Industrial Suburb and Adjoining Densely Populated Areas 
c) Yeswanthpur APMC Market & Yard and Adjoining Densely Populated Areas 
d) Yeswanthpur Fruit Market and Adjoining Densely Populated Areas 
7. Preparation of Slum Redevelopment Plans  
8. Development of SWM Facilities 
g) Dry Waste Collection Centre:   31 No. 
h) Organic Waste Collection Centre: 04 No. 
i) Aggregators:   01 No.  
9. Heritage Area Protection and Conservation Scheme 
a) Heritage Master Plan for Malleshwaram Heritage Zone and Bangalore Palace Heritage  
b) Heritage Area Improvement and Development scheme  
10. Identifying and Declaration of Street Vending Areas/ Zones for follow ing areas 
a) Malleshwaram 
b) Mathikere 
c) Yashwanthpur  
11. Preparation of Flood Mitigation Plan for following areas 
a) Yeshwanthpur Railway Station,  
b) KEB Compound Mathikere,  
c) Brindavanagar (below Mathikere Tank Market)  
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
8-1 
8.PD 07: RT NAGAR - HEBBAL-GKVK 
 
1. The Hebbal Planning District comprises of 12 wards namely Byatarayanapura (7), Kodigehall i 
(8), Vidyaranyapura (9), Doddabommasandra (10), Radhakrishna Temple (18), Sanjay Nagar 
(19), Ganga Nagar (20), Hebbal (21), Vishwa nathnagenahalli (22), Manorayanapalya (33),  
Gangenahalli (34) and Jayachamarajendra Nagar (46).  
2. Bellary Road providing connectivity to Kempegowda International Airpor t/ Hyderabad, Outer 
Ring Road, Jayamahal Road, New BEL Road, Sanjay Nagar Main Road, Dasarahalli Main Ro ad, 
Kodigehalli Main Road, Vidyaranyapura Road, etc define the overall road network of the PD.  
3. The PD is fully developed within the outer ring road and has some pot ential for further 
densification outside ORR. However, redevelopment of certain parts within ORR is seen 
required.  
4. Government establishment (like Defence, Collages, Departments offices), Specialty Hospitals, 
Commercial Activities and High Rise High Density Residential developments along the Bellary 
Road, large public sector institutions like BEL and GKVK, a number of d ense mixed 
settlements, layouts with well-planned grid of roads and high rise residential devel opments, 
and presence of seven lakes (including Hebbal, Nagawara, Dodda Bommasandra) define th e 
spatial characteristics of this planning district.  
5. It is important to note that the Ghandi Krushi Vignana Kendra (GKVK) Campus, 
UniversityofAgricultural Sciences, Bengaluru has beed declared as Biodiversity Heritage Si te 
under the provisions of Biological Diversity Act 2002 .  
 
 
 
Population (2011 Census): 4,96,056 
Area of PD: 3923.02 ha 
Wards in PD: 12 
Gross Density: 125 pph 
Hebbal Planning District is located at 
Central North of planning area and is 
within BBMP. The PD is characterised 
presence of Bellary Road (NH7) 
connecting International Airport and the 
Outer Ring Road, GVKV, defence 
institutions, flying school, and residential 
development in the form of layouts and 
high rise apartments. The PD fairly 
developed with potential for further 
densification.  
 
Master Plan aims at stabilising the areas 
within ORR and promoting developments 
outside ORR with TOD along Metro 
Corridor.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
8-2 
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography 
6. As per Census 2011, PD has 4,96,056 inhabitants, which has increased by 57.6 % from  
2001(3,14,788) and there are 2,06,919 (41.7%) resident workers. There are 1,2 2,568 
households (2011), with an average household size of 4.04, which slightly hig her than BMA 
(4.01). The gross density is 126 pph due to presence large public –semipublic activities, lakes, 
BEL, defence areas and Jakkur Flying School. However, at ward level, the gross density is 
highest in Manorayanapalya Ward (592 pph) and lowest in Vidyaranyapura Ward (58 pph). 
Industry and Commerce 
7. Various government institutions - like Indian Veternary Research Institute, Gov ernment 
Veternary Collage, National Bureau of Agricultural Insect Resources, NBSS & LUP, GKVK 
Agriculture University; several other private institutes, Healthcare facilities like - Aster C MI 
Hospital, Columbia Asia Hospital, Government Homeopathy Hospital; Commercial Acti vities 
along Bellary Road (focused on IT/ ITES and Business Offices), Outer Ring Road and certai n 
main roads, and BEL factory, are the major employment/ work centres.  
8. The work force participation rate is 41.40% with an estimated employment generation of 
about 1,50,331. The important work centres are BEL factory, the various public insti tutions 
mentioned above and various large hospitals present.  
Existing Land Use  
9. The predominant land uses are residential and Public Semi Public use covering 32 .55% and 
~21.57% of area respectively. While, 13.64% of PD area is still vacant. The tot al area under 
transport communication is 9.62 %. The area under industrial use is about 5.12%, whereas 
commercial use accounts for 3.85%.  
10. Figure 1 and Table 2 present the existing land use map and existing land use are statement 
for PD 07.  
Housing and Slums 
11. The planned government layouts like RT Nagar, Sahakar Nagar, BEL Layout, AECS Layo ut, etc 
and several private layouts (both planned and unplanned) with low rise high densi ty 
dominate the residential landscape. However, residential developments along Bellary Road  
and ORR are of high rise high density nature. There are several highly dense areas like 
Hebbala, Dinnur, Ayyapa layout, Manorayana Palya, Chamundeswari Layout, etc within PD.  
12. There are a total of 2,06,919 households with 3.63% living in slums. There are 38  slums, of 
which only 6 are notified. While each ward has slums, Byatarayanpura with 7 slums has most  
slums among the wards within PD.  
 
 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
8-3 
Figure 8-1: PD 7 Existing Land Use Map 
 
 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
8-4 
Table 8-1: PD 07 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 1276.80 32.55 
Commercial 150.94 3.85 
Industrial 200.97 5.12 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 846.10 21.57 
Unclassified 125.54 3.20 
Public Utility 22.84 0.58 
Parks & Open Spaces 101.38 2.58 
Transport Communication 377.24 9.62 
Vacant 664.49 16.94 
Agriculture 0.00 0.00 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 16.08 0.41 
Water Bodies 140.63 3.58 
Total 3923.01 100.00 
Traffic and Transportation 
13. Bellary Road, Outer Ring Road, Jayamahal Road, New BEL Road, 80ft Road, Sanjay Nagar Main 
Road/ Gundappa Road/ Dr.Rajagapoal Road, CBI/ Dinnur Main Road, Sumangali Sevashram a 
Main Road, Devegowda Road/ JC Nagar Main Road, KHB Colony Main Road, RT Nagar M ain 
Road, Visawanath Nagenhalli Main Road, Dasarahalli Main Road, Kempapura Main Road, 
Amruthahalli Main Road, Jakkur Main Road, Bhoopasandra Main Road, Kodigehalli Main 
Road, GKVK Road & Vidyaranyapura Road define the overall road network of the PD.  
14. NH7 (Bellary road) and ORR are the Major arterial roads and carry maximum traffic in  BMA. 
The major form of public transport is BMTC buses and private buses. Airport taxis travel  
between the city and BIAL while autos act as local feeder services. BMRCL has proposed  
metro link to International Airport. There are two bus depots, located at Hebbal an d RT 
Nagar. Railway lines to Hyderabad, Devenahalli, and connecting to KR Puram, Yesw anthpur, 
and Byapannahali Railway Yard are present in PD. Also, there is a small railway yard at 
Hebbal. 
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
15. As per BWSSB, around 40% of the households have metered water supply connections while 
25% of the households have metered sewage & sanitation connections. There are 5 Groun d 
Level Reservoir (GLR) and 6 Pumping Stations and Borewells. As per BBMP, there a 7 DWCC 
for SWM. As per KPTCL, there is one existing 220kv sub-station and one 2 20kv substation is 
under implementation. There is no fire station within the planning district and i s served by 
fire stations located in adjoin planning districts.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
8-5 
16. Public institutions of both state and national importance located in this P D, as mentioned 
earlier. In addition to these, there are 190 schools located in the PD. There are 2 8 hospitals 
located in with total bed capacity of 977. The important private hospitals include Bapti st, 
Columbia Asia and Aster CMI hospital. 
Park and Open Spaces 
17. Parks and Open spaces account for 2.58% of the total PD area. GKVK, a national level institute 
which undertakes R&D in the field of agriculture, has patches where different species of  trees 
and flowers are cultivated. Further, there are several small neighborhood/ layout level parks.  
Lakes and Drainage 
18. There are 7 lakes as per revenue village maps, namely Hebbal Kere, Dodda Bommasandra 
Kere Nagawara Kere, Amrutahalli Kere, Narsipura Kere, one additional lake in Narsipura 
revenue village and Byatarayapura Kere. Except for Amruthahalli and Byatarayapura kere all 
other lakes are interlinked cascading lakes which support rich bio diversity of flora and fauna.  
19. The Natural Drainage system cover large developed area. Hebbal Kere has the largest 
catchment areas followed by Nagawara and Dodda Bommasandra.  
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: MIX OF STABILISATION AND CONSOLIDATION, PROMOTION OF PUBLIC 
TRANSPORT, TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT, REDEVELOPMENT, FLOOD PROTECTION AND 
LAKE PROTECTION 
PROPOSALS 
1. Planning District is falling under two planning zones of RMP2031 – Planning Zone A 
(Stabilization) and Planning Zone B (Consolidation). Hence the governing prin ciples for the 
proposals for this PD are derived from both the concepts. The governing principle for thi s PD 
are as following: 
a. Development of Public Transport Infrastructure to increase the share of public 
transport 
b. Employment Generation through promotion of defined high density comme rcial 
corridors (TOD based) along Bellary Road and Outer Ring Road.  
c. High Density Commercial and Residential Development along TOD Corridors.  
d. Defined commercialization along certain roads 
e. Redevelopment of densely populated and congested areas / slums 
f. Protection and Conservation of Lake System and Flood Protection 
2. The Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use Distribution for the PD is depicte d in 
Figure 8-2 and Table 8- 3 respectively.  
 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
8-6 
Figure 8-2: PD 7 Proposed Land Use Map 
 
 
 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
8-7 
Table 8-2: PD 07 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 1713.55 43.68 
Commercial 65.31 1.66 
Industrial 177.91 4.53 
Public & Semi Public 730.63 18.62 
Unclassified 118.69 3.03 
Public Utility 21.18 0.54 
Parks / Open Spaces 97.06 2.47 
Transport & 
Communication 560.01 14.28 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 15.53 0.40 
Water Bodies 134.97 3.44 
NGT Buffer 288.16 7.35 
Total Developable Area 3923.01 100.00 
Agriculture 0 - 
Total PD Area 3923.01 - 
 
3. RMP2031 poposed city level public transport infrastructure like CRS, Metro and Mo no Rail 
are running along roads within the Planning District. 
a. Commuter Rail Service (CRS) from Yashwantpur: The RMP2031 proposes that CRS at 
regional level will start/ terminate at the Yeshwanthpur Railway Station to 
Dodaballapur, Devanahalli, Tumukuru, etc and integrated with city public transpo rt 
network (Metro/ mono/ Bus). It is proposed that Lottegollahalli and Kodig ehalli 
railway station falling within the planning district  be developed as CSR Stations.  
b. Metro Rail ORR Link: It is proposed to develop metro link along Outer Ri ng Road and 
with 3 stations within this PD – namely Lottegollahalli Railway Station, Hebbal 
(interchange with BMTC Bus Depot and Mono Rail), and Kempapura/ Veeranapalya 
and leading further to Manyata Tech Park.  
c. LRT/ Mono Rail/ BRT on Bellary Road: The proposed Mono Rail / BRT/ LRT along the 
Bellary road pass through the PD and it is proposed to develop stations near M ekhri 
Circle, HMT Bhavan, Gangenhalli/ CBI Bus Stop, RT Nagar Traffic Police Station, 
Hebbal Bus Stop, Hebbal BMTC Bus Depot (interchange with Metro ORR), Columbia 
Asia Hospital, Kodihalli Gate, Byatarayanapura, GKVK, Allasandra, and then going to 
NES Bus Station in PD 20.  
d. Mono Rail /LRT/BRT - Hessaraghatta: The proposed Mono Rail/LRT/BRT to 
Hessaraghatta starts from Lottegahalli Railway Station (interchange with Metro + 
Railway) and runs along BEL Road and Hessaraghatta Road till Dodda Bylakere.   
4. Intermodal Interchange Stations are proposed to be developed at 3 locations – a) 
Lottegollhalli Railway Station b) Hebbal c) Mekhri Circle. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
8-8 
5. To improve the access to public transport it is proposed to develop a BMTC Bus  Station near 
Kodigehalli Railway Station. This will be integrated with Kodigehalli Railway Station 
6. Transit Oriented Development Zone is proposed to be applicable around all metro/ Mono Rai l 
stations/ terminals/ interchanges located outside ORR i.e in Planning Zone B.  
7. To improve the accessibility to Public Transport Stations (Metro, Mono, BMTC  Bus Stations 
and CRS Railway Stations) and Educational Institutes, it is proposed to strengthen the existing 
road network by providing footpaths and cycle tracks (wherever feasible).  
8. The RMP2031 proposes redevelopment/ re-engineering of Hebbal Flyover/ J unction and 
Allasandra Rail Gate Junction (Intersection of Bellary Road and Doddaballapur (SH 9) Road) as 
these two are major bottleneck for traffic flow. In addition, the RMP2031 has identified 21 
junctions for geometric improvements for better and smoother traffic flow a re to be taken up 
on priority.  
9. The natural drainage between Dadda Bommasandra Kere to Yelle Mallappa Shetty Kere an d 
beyond BMA boundary is classified as Primary drainage, hence it is critical to prote ct and 
conserve the lake and drainage system for areas which are either at flood risk or low lyi ng. It 
is therefore proposed that all the drainage and lakes as defined in RMP2031 are kept free  of 
all encumbrances, sludge, SWM, and no sewage  allowed to flow into the stream s and lakes.It 
is also proposed that all lakes  be properly interconnected and rejuvenated . The RMP2031 
proposes that a details lake and stream/ drainage rejuvenation plan and adjoinin g area 
improvement plan be prepared.   
10. Re-development/ upgradation of infrastructure in areas like Vayunandana Layout, Do dda 
Bommasandra, and 38 slums is proposed to be taken- up in a phased manner.  
11. Some parts of Planning District are prone to Urban Flooding while some  areas are at fire risk. 
It is proposed that local area Disaster and Hazard Mitigation Plan covering aspects related 
Urban Flooding, Fire, & Emergency Situations be prepared for areas like Sultanpalya, An anda 
Nagara, Pilappa Garden, and other areas. 
12. To cater to management and operations of Solid Waste in future, it is proposed that i n 
addition to existing facilities, 24 Dry Waste Collection Centres, and 3 Organi c Waste 
Collection Centres are proposed to be developed within the Planning District by BBMP.  
13. To improve green cover and provide comfort to pedestrians and improve street aesthetics, 
the RMP2031 proposes road side and avenue plantation for arterial roads, sub -arterial and 
important roads. 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projec ts for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD 7: RT Nagar - Hebbal - GKVK 
1. Road Development Plan  
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Catego ry -1 
Roads.  
b. Widening ofCertain Roads: 
i. Jakkur Main Road,  
ii. Dasarahalli Main Road 
iii. Kodigehalli Road road,  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
8-9 
iv. Rajiv Gandhi Nagar Road,  
v. Kodigehalli - Thindlu Main Road 
c. Redevelopment of Hebbal Flyover and Allasandra Railway Gate Flyover 
d. Overall Geometric Improvement of Certain Roads 
i. 80ft Road,  
ii. Sanjay Nagar Main Road/ Gundappa Road/ Dr.Rajagapoal Road,  
iii. CBI/ Dinnur Main Road,  
iv. Sumangali Sevashrama Main Road,  
v. Devegowda Road/ JC Nagar Main Road,  
vi. KHB Colony Main Road,  
vii. RT Nagar Main Road,  
viii. Visawanath Nagenhalli Main Road,  
ix. Dasarahalli Main Road,  
x. Kempapura Main Road,  
xi. Amruthahalli Main Road,  
xii. Jakkur Main Road,  
xiii. Bhoopasandra Main Road,  
xiv. Kodigehalli Main Road,  
xv. GKVK Road  
xvi. Vidyaranyapura Road 
e. Junction Improvement Programme: 
i. BEL junction,  
ii. M.S. Ramaiah Hospital Junction,  
iii. Mekhri circle. 
iv. Bhadrappa Layout Junction (Intersection of Kodigehalli Main Rd & ORR), 
v. Devinagar Junction (intersection of Devinagar Main Rd and ORR) 
vi. Dodda Bommasandra Arch Junction Veeranapalya Junction  
vii. Jakkur Main Road Junction on Bellary Road 
viii. Byatarayana Pura Junction on Bellary Road (Amruthahalli Main Road) 
ix. Yelahanka Kodigehalli Gate (Kodigehalli Main Road) 
x. Big Market Sahakara Nagar (20th Main Road) 
xi. Vidyaranyapura Junction (Bus Station) 
xii. Nanjappa Circle (including intersection with Temple Road) 
xiii. Dasarahalli Junction (Intersection of Kempapura Main Rd & Dasarahalli Main 
Road) 
xiv. Ganesh Temple Circle (Kodigehalli Main Road) 
xv. Vidhyaranyapura BEL 1st Block (Intersection of Vidhyaranyapura Main Road 
& Ramchandrapura Rd) 
xvi. NTI Ground Junction (Intersection of Vidhyaranyapura Main Road & 12h 
Main Rd) 
xvii. Tennis Court Junction 
xviii. St. JohŶ͛s SĐhool JuŶĐtioŶ ;Ŷeaƌ Coffee Boaƌd LaǇout PaƌkͿ  
xix. Jantha Colony Junction (intersection of Kuvempu Road and Jantha Colony 
Road) 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
8-10 
xx. Intersection of Kuvempu Road and Kempapura Road) 
xxi. Devinagar BEL Junction (Intersection of Jalageramma Temple Rd and 
Devinagar Main Road) 
2. Development of Public Transport System:  
a. Namma Metro: Outer Ring Road. 
b. LRT/ Mono Rail: Cubbon Park to Airport Metro Link on Bellary Road 
c. LRT/ Mono Rail/BRT to Hessarghatta 
3. Development of Intermodal Interchange Stations:  
a. Hebbal Integrated Intermodal Passenger Station  
b. Mekhri Circle  
c. Lottegollahalli Railway Station  
4. Accessibility Improvement Plans for stations and educational instiuti ons.  
5. Preparation of Parking Plans for Commercial Areas/ Public Building s/ Places  
a. Vidyaranyapura Road,  
b. Dr. Rajgopal Road,   
c. Bellary Road,  
d. R.T Nagar main Road, and  
e. Sultanpalya main road. 
6. Preparation of Comprehensive Area Redevelopment/ Upgradation Plans :  
a. Vayunandana Layout 
b. Byatarayanpura 
7. Preparation of Slum Redevelopment Plans 
8. Development of SWM Facilities: 
a) Dry Waste Collection Centre:   24 No. 
b) Organic Waste Collection Centre: 03 No. 
9. Disaster & Hazard Mitigation Plan:   
a. Urban Flooding Mitigation Plan for Flood Prone Areas (to be determined by BBMP) 
b. Development of Mini-Fire Station in RT Nagar 
10. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes and Streams:  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification  of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Preparation of Lakes & Streams Rejuvenation Plan : 
a. Hebbal Kere Rejuvination Plan,  
b. Dodda Bommasandra Kere Rejuvination Plan  
c. Nagawara Kere Rejuvination Plan  
d. Amrutahalli Kere Rejuvination Plan  
e. Narsipura Kere, Rejuvination Plan  
f. Byatarayapura Kere  Rejuvination Plan  
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Surrounding Area development plan be prepared to upgrade the drainage and 
sewage infrastructure to stop flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as 
dumping of SWM.  
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
9-1 
9.PD 08: THANISANDRA-NAGAWARA-RICHARDS 
TOWN 
 
1. PD consists of 14 BBMP wards and namely - Thanisandra(6), Nagavara(23), HBR Layout( 24), 
Kammanahalli(28), Kacharakanahalli(29), Kadugondanahalli(30), Kushal Nagar(31), 
Kavalbyrasandra(32), Devarajeevanahalli(47), Muneshwara Nagar(48), Lingarajapura(49) and 
Sagayapuram(60), SK Garden (61) and Ramaswamy Palya (62)  
2. Outer Ring Road, Nagawara Main Road, Thanisandra Main Road, Hennur Main Road, are 
major arterial roads forming the connectivity network within the planning district.  
3. Highly Dense areas within the outer ring road, Manyata Tech Park – a major employment 
centre within city, commercial developments along the roads, high rise developm ents along 
Nagawara and Thanisandra main roads, higher order educational institutes like – Dr. BR 
Ambedkar Medical Collage, Arabic Collage, Karnataka Institute of Leather Technology, et c, 
flood prone areas, Military Grounds and historical Richards Town define the spatia l 
characteristics of PD.  
4. The PD has good potential to accommodate additional population outside Outer Ring Road, 
at the same time redevelopment/ upgradation of certain dense areas within ORR is seen 
required. 
 
 
 
Population (2011 Census): 6,22,667 
Area of PD: 27.98 sqkm (2798.64 Ha) 
Wards in PD: 14 
Gross Density (2011 Census): 222 pph  
 
The Thanisandra-Nagawara-Richards 
Town Planning District is located centre - 
north of BBMP and in between PD 7 and 
PD 9. The PD is characterised by presence 
of historical Richards Town, highly dense 
areas within ORR, defence establishment, 
an major employment centre – Manyata 
Tech Park, high rise high density 
development and has potential for 
further growth despite having higher 
densities in certain areas.  
 
Master Plan, while looking at 
redevelopment/ upgradation of dense 
areas, proposes further densification of 
through high rise development outside 
ORR with TOD along Metro Corridor.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
9-2 
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography  
5. The PD has a population of 6,22,667 inhabitants as per census 2011, with a decad al growth 
rate of 40%. There are 2,42,892 resident workers with a work force participation of 39%, 
which is lower than the BMA average of 44.5%. There are 1,38,067 households (20 11), with 
an average household size of 4.50, which is higher than BMA (4.01).  
6. The gross density is highest in Muneshwara Nagar Ward (746 pph) and lowest in Thani sandra 
Ward (72 pph). Hyper densities are observed in the wards within Outer Ring Road. Wards like 
Kammanahalli(28), Kacharakanahalli(29), Kadugondanahalli(30), Kushal Nagar(31), 
Muneshwara Nagar(48), Lingarajapura(49) have gross densities ranging between 450 to  650 
pph (as per Census 2011). It is also noteworthy that Thanisandra ward had a growth rate of 
252% between 2001 and 2011 mainly due to its close proximity to Man yatha Tech Park and 
still has potential future growth.  
Existing Land Use  
7. Residential Use dominate the Existing Land Use with about 40% of PD area under resid ential 
activities, however with 26% of vacant use, PD has huge potential for further increase i n 
residential use. The Industrial use and commercial use accounts for 5.8% and 3.8%  
respectively. Figure 9-1  and Table 9-1  presents the existing land use map 2015 and existing 
land use area statement for Planning District respectively.  
 
Table 9-1: PD 08 Existing Land Use Area Statement  
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 1113.41 39.79 
Commercial 160.55 5.74 
Industrial 106.04 3.79 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 116.77 4.17 
Unclassified 140.53 5.02 
Public Utility 5.42 0.19 
Parks & Open Spaces 48.17 1.72 
Transport Communication 292.47 10.45 
Vacant 734.10 26.24 
Agriculture 0.00 0.00 
Forest 14.44 0.52 
Streams 17.80 0.64 
Water Bodies 48.30 1.73 
Total 2798.00 100.00 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
9-3 
Figure 9-1: PD 8 Existing Land Use Map  
 
Industry and Commerce 
8. Industrial land uses account for 3.62% while commercial land uses account for 5.76% as per 
the existing land use 2015. Commercialization has taken place along all major arterial roads 
like Nagawara main road, Hennur main road and Kamanahalli main road. The important wo rk 
centres are Manyata Tech Park and a few small scale industries related to IT, Clothing and  
Building Construction (fabricators etc) are also present in the PD. Various activitie s have 
come up around Manyatha Tech Park like high rise apartments, paying guest 
accommodations, hostels, restaurants and cafes.  

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
9-4 
9. Kammanahalli has experienced major urban transformation from a sleepy outgrowth of 
Bengaluru to a vibrant commercial area with a large number of restaurants and high end  
shopping centres. Kammanahalli main road and CMR road has experience maximum 
commercialization in the last 10 years. Also with a large number of private educatio nal 
institutions, there is a large amount of expatriate students residing in and around  
Kammanahalli ward. The most notable shopping malls are Elements malls at Nagawara and 
newly constructed Phoenix Infocity mall at Jai Bharath Nagar. On the western edge of 
Kacharkanahalli lake, a weekly market is setup by the local traders.   
Housing and Slums 
10. The HBR Layout, Richards Town, KBH Colony are some of the planned residential layouts in 
the predominantly residential area where highly dense private layouts define the residential 
character. PD has both planned residential layouts and unplanned low income dense 
neighbourhoods. 7% of the total population lives within slums. Some of the l ayouts do not 
have basis facilities.   
11. There are a total of 49 slums distributed among all the 12 wards in the PD, ou t of which only 
13 are notified. 18% of the total slums are located within SK Garden ward.  
Transportation 
12. The major forms of public transport are BMTC buses and a few private buses,  while autos, 
cabs act as feeder services. There is one bus depot at Hennur and one Bus Terminal at Kaval 
Byrasandra.  
13. Two railway lines mark their presence within the PD, namely Yeshwantpur (tumukur line) to 
Byapannahalli/ KR Puram connecting Whitefield and KR Puram (Salem line) to Dodd aballapur. 
The two important railway stations located here are Bangalore East and Banaswadi.  
14. The major arterial roads like Outer Ring Road, Nagawara Main Road, Hennur Main Road, 
Kammanahalli Main Road are the major arterial roads and take more traffic than other ro ads 
within the PD. The important junction includes, Intersections of Pottery Road and Tann ery 
Road- below the rail under bridge, Nagawara Main Road meeting ORR, Hennur Main  Road 
meeting ORR, Intersection of Hall Road and Hennur Main Road, Intersection w here Hennur 
Main Road bifurcates into 80 feet road and Kacharkanahalli Main Road, and J unction of 
Hennur Cross at Hennur Main Road 
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
15. As per BWSSB data 34.3% of the households have metered water supply connections while 
only 19% of the households have metered sewage & sanitation connections. Two groun d 
level reservoirs exist at DJ Halli (2.27 ML) and Kaval Byrasandra (4 ML) while two s ewage 
treatment plants exist at Nagawara lake (60 MLD and 100 MLD). As per BBMP, there are 7 dry 
waste collection centres located in the PD. As per KPTCL, there is one 220 KV substation.  
16. There are 298 schools located in the PD. The major schools are Clarence High Scho ol, 
National Junior School while colleges include Ambedkar Medical College, C MR institutes, 
Indian Academy, Dr. SR Chandershekar Institute of Speech and Hearing.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
9-5 
17. There are 19 hospitals out of which 3 are Government hospitals while the remaining are 
private hospitals. The major hospitals are Dr. Ambedkar Medical College Hospital, Sathy a 
Hospital with 923 beds. 
Lakes and Drainage 
18. As per revenue there are five kere namely – Rachenahalli Kere, Hennuru Kere, 
Kacharakanahalli Kere, Kadugondanahalli kere, and Lingarajapura Kere. However, except for 
Rachenahalli Kere, other four lakes have been breached fully or partly. Hennuru Kere is now a 
park and partly HBR Layout, whereas Kacharakanhalli kere is partly breached.  
19. The PD area falls under the larger catchment of Hebbal – Yella Mallappa Chetty Kere. Certain 
localities like Basavanna Nagara near Kadugodanahalli, Shampura Slum, Govindapura - Near  
Nagavara, Thammana Layout near Lingarajapura, Munireddy Palya, DJ Halli, etc ar e 
vulnerable to flooding.  
Parks and Open Spaces 
20. Richards Park, Hennuru Lake Park, neighbourhood parks within HBR layout, and other s mall 
parks are within the PD. PD lacks open spaces and parks especially in the highly dense 
neighbourhoods of Nagawara, Hennur and Thanisandra. 
Heritage and Culture 
21. There are 24 heritage sites out of which 17 are residential buildings. Majority of the heritag e 
sites are located in Sagayapura ward. These are mainly Colonial bungalows.  
22. Some of the important heritage sites include Holy Ghost Church, Tree Lined  avenues of 
Richards town and Colonial bungalows on Viviani road, Pottery road etc. 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS:  MIX OF STABILISATION AND CONSOLIDATION, PROMOTION OF 
PUBLIC TRANSPORT, TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT, REDEVELOPMENT, FLOOD 
PROTECTION AND LAKE PROTECTION  
PROPOSALS 
1. Planning District is falling under two planning zones of RMP2031 – Planning Zone A 
(Stabilization) and Planning Zone B (Consolidation). Hence the governing prin ciples for the 
proposals for this PD are derived from both the concepts. The governing principle for thi s PD 
are as following: 
a. Development of Public Transport Infrastructure to increase the share of public 
transport 
b. High Density Commercial and Residential Development along TOD Corridors.  
c. Optimal use of potential areas for further densification 
d. Defined commercialization along certain roads 
e. Protection and Conservation of Lake System and Flood Protection 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
9-6 
f. Redevelopment/ upgradation of densely populated and congested areas / slums 
2. The Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use Distribution for the PD are depicted in 
Figure 9-2 and Table 9- 2 respectively.  
Figure 9-2: PD 08 Proposed Land Use Map 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
9-7 
Table 9-2: PD 08 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 1701.41 60.79 
Commercial 55.88 2.00 
Industrial 70.83 2.53 
Public & Semi Public 100.28 3.58 
Unclassified 135.28 4.83 
Public Utility 5.24 0.19 
Parks / Open Spaces 35.72 1.28 
Transport & Communication 325.58 11.63 
Forest 10.37 0.37 
Streams 17.81 0.64 
Water Bodies 47.47 1.70 
NGT Buffer 292.78 10.46 
  0.00 
Total Developable Area 2798.63 100.00 
Agriculture 0 - 
Total PD Area 2798.63 - 
3. RMP2031 proposed city level public transport infrastructure like CRS, Metro and Mono Rail 
are running along roads within the Planning District. 
a. Metro Gottigere – Nagawara – International Aiport Link (Red Line): Metro Phase II 
Gottigere Nagawara (mostly underground) is passing through the PD and the same 
link is being extended to International Airport as part of Phase III. The netwo rk 
designed for Metro Phase II includes 5 stations within planning district, nam ely – 
Pottery Town, Tannery Town, Venkateshpura, Arabic Collage, and Nagawara (to be 
developed as intermodal junction with ORR metro). In addition, depending on the 
feasibility, it is proposed to develop stations Thanisandra and K Narayanap ura Cross 
along the Nagawara – International Airport link within the planning district.    
b. Metro ORR Link: It is proposed to develop metro link along Outer Ri ng Road and with 
3 stations within this PD – namely Manyata Tech Park, Nagawara (interchange with 
Phase II) and HRBR Layout (near Hennur Junction) and leading to Kalyan Nagar BMTC 
Bus Depot on ORR in PD 9.  
c. Mono Rail Link – 6: The proposed Mono Rail Link – 6 around Inner Peripheral Ring 
Road passes through the PD and it is proposed to develop station at Thanisan dra and 
Rachenahalli (Intersection of Rachenahalli Main road and IPRR)  
d. BRTS: BRTS is proposed along Hennur Bagaluru Main Road, from Intermediate Rin g 
Road at Pottery Road towards Bagalur.  
4. Intermodal Interchange Stations are proposed to be developed at 3 locations – a) Nagawara 
b) Thanisandra - Intersection of Thanishadra & IPRR and c) Kalyan Nagar. 
5. Transit Oriented Development Zone is proposed to be applicable around all metro/ Mono Rail  
stations/ terminals/ interchanges located outside ORR i.e in Planning Zone B.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
9-8 
6. In order to improve last mile connectivity and extend the public transport sy stem to 
neighborhood level it is proposed to develop a BMTC Bus Station along Than isandra Main 
Road (at the intersection of Thaninsandra Main Road and Intermediate Ring Road).  
7. To improve the accessibility to Public Transport Stations (Metro, Mono, BMTC  Bus Stations 
and CRS Railway Stations) and Educational Institutes, it is proposed to strengthen the existing 
road network by providing footpaths and cycle tracks (wherever feasible).  
8. To improve the road network within the City it is proposed to develop in ner peripheral ring 
road, which passes through the planning district mainly along the railway line . Outer Ring 
Road, Thanisandra Main Road/ Nagawara Main Road/ Arabic Collage Main Road, Inner PRR, 
Hennur Main Road, Jakkur Main Road/ 80ft Road/ K Narayanapura Main Road (conn ecting 
Bellary Road to Hennuru Main road) have been designated as Arterial Roads.  
9. The RMP2031 has identified new link within the Planning district to impro ve the connectivity 
within the Planning District for ease of traffic movement.  
 HBR 2nd Block to LIngarajpuram New Links:  The 3 major radial roads namely Nagawara Main 
Road, Hennur Main Road and Kammanahalli Main Road are at an average distance of 1 .5km 
between each other and take on them large volumes of daily traffic. The flyovers o n Hennur 
Main Road and Dodda Banaswadi Main Road take thorough traffic via Lingrajpuram and  
Maruthi Sevanagar towards the ORR. These flyovers are plagued with chronic traffic jams 
throughout the day.  An 18m link is proposed from HBR 2nd block to Lingrajpuram Main Road 
along the existing railway track and existing drain. This will act like an alt ernate to already 
busy Tannery Road and a direct connection onto Lingrajpuram Flyover can be g iven from this 
road. 
Figure 9-3: PD 8 New Road Link 
 
 Manyatha Tech Park to Kempapura Main Road New Link:  It is proposed to develop a 12m 
link connecting Manyatha Tech Park with Kempapura Main Road passing along t he 
Rachenahalli Lake. 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
9-9 
 Completing Veeranapalya Main Road to Nagawara Main Road Link:  A road starting from 
Veeranapalya Main to towards Nagawara Main road mostly exists on ground a sm all patch 
~100 is missing. It is proposed to develop this small patch and complete  the link between 
veernapalya main road and Nagawara Main road. This link runs parallel to ORR.  
 Connectivity between KHB Colony Main Road and Veeranapal ya Road along with Railway 
Under Pass:  A link is proposed to be developed from KHB Colony Main road (from po int 
opposite to International Institute of Business Studies) then cross railway line (under p ass is 
proposed to be developed) to connect to existing road adjoining to Abo dh Valmark 
Apartments leading to Veeranapalya Main Road.   
 Byapanahalli Main Road to Kammanahalli Main Road New Lin k: An 18m road link 
connecting Byapanahalli Main Road straight to Kammanahalli Main Road through Ind ian Oil 
Dept, below the flyover and crossing the railway track is proposed to be developed as part of 
redevelopment of Indian Oil Sevanagar Flyover. 
 Development of Railway Underpass to connect 9th Main and 7th Cross Road: It is proposed 
to provide connectivity between Arabic Collage Road and Hennur Main Ro ad (flyover road) 
by to establishing connectivity between 9th Main Road (with BESCOM Office) and 7th Cross 
Road and constructing a railway underpass between Fareed Masjeed (9th main) and 
Chamundeswari Temple on 7th Cross.  
 Development of Connection between Kempapura Main Road to Thanis andra Main Road to 
Hennur Main Road (via Manyata Tech Park): Using existing roads alignments which are 
partly developed, a 15m wide road is proposed to be development from Kempap ura Main 
Road to Hennur Main Road via Manyata Tech Park, using existing road like 2nd Main Road, 
Bharat Nagar, to meet Thanisandra Main Road then following existing road till rail way line – a 
railway underpass is proposed to be developed to connect to Mar Thimotheus Street meeting 
Hennur Bagaluru Main Road.  
10. The RMP2031 proposes upgradation of certain roads to improve their service through 
geometric improvements.   
11. The RMP2031 has identified 24 critical junctions for geometric improvements f or better and 
smoother traffic flow and to be taken up on priority.  
12. The natural drainage between Rachenahalli Kere and Kal Kere is classified as Primary whereas 
an existing stream starting some wherein Kaval Byrasandra leading to primary stream is  
classified as Secondary Stream by the RMP2031, as these streams caters to large areas. The 
RMP2031 therefore proposes that streams classified as Primary, Secondary and Tertiary 
falling within planning district  be kept free of all encumbrances, sludge, SWM , and no 
sewage  allowed to flow into the streams and lakes. It is also proposed that  all lakes  be 
properly interconnected and rejuvenated. The RMP2031 also proposes rejuvenation  of 
Kacharkanahalli Kere and Rachenahalli Kere.  
13. It is proposed that the existing tanning Industrial area be redeveloped as Park/ Playgroun d to 
provide recreational space for surrounding localities which are devoid of par k/ playground 
facilities. This should be done keeping the local context and associational values.  
14. The RMP2031 proposes redevelopment of Tanning Industrial Area and Slaught er house for 
creation of much needed Parks, playground, sports facility, recreational areas, etc. The 
redevelopment is aimed at providing recreational facilities in highly dense area. It i s also 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
9-10 
proposed that land should be earmarked for development of mini-fire station as part of 
redevelopment.  
15. The RMP2031 has delineated Richards Town Heritage Zone within this PD, in the ar ea 
surrounding Richards Park and including Holy Ghost Church.  The urban form is structured 
around religious architecture and large green open spaces. The bungalow typology can be 
seen here, with traditional Madras tiles- monkey top roofs with teak rose windows with stain 
glass. The bungalows were set amidst large green plots showing the social status of the 
owners. The major architectural style seen is a mixture of Gothic and Colonial architecture. 
The zone also has beautiful tree lined avenues which must be conserved.  
16. There are 49 slums (both notified and non-notified) within the PD spread across 12 wards.  
Maximum concentration of slums is in SK Garden and Ramaswamy Palya ward. It is impo rtant 
to provide the existing slums with better infrastructure services and living con ditions and 
hence the RMP2031 proposes redevelopment of the slums. It is proposed that 
redevelopment and upgradation has to be preferably in-situ with an objective to provide 
better housing/ living conditions.  
17. In order to cater to present and future infrastructure requirements, the RMP2031 proposes 
development Sewage Treatment Plant near Hennur Park, one 220kv power sub-station,  and 
additional 33 DWCCs, 4 OWCCs, 1 Aggregator, and 1 CPU for solid waste management wi thin 
the planning district.   
Figure 9-4: PD 8 Richards Town Heritage Zone  
 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
9-11 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD 8: Thanisandra-Nagawara-Richards Town. 
1. Road development Plan 
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Catego ry -1 
Roads (as listed in Annexure) and other roads in phased manner.   
i. Outer Ring Road,  
ii. Thanisandra Main Road/ Nagawara Main Road/ Arabic Collage Main 
Road 
iii. Inner Peripheral Ring Road,  
iv. Hennur Main Road,  
v. Jakkur Main Road/ 80ft Road/ K Narayanapura Main Road (connecting 
Bellary Road to Hennuru Main road)  
b. Development of identified new link/ improved connectivity:   
i. HBR 2nd Block to LIngarajpuram New Link 
ii. Manyatha Tech Park to Kempapura Main Road New Link  
iii. Veeranapalya Main Road to Nagawara Main Road Link  
iv. Connectivity between KHB Colony Main Road and Veeranapalya Road  
v. Byapanahalli Main Road to Kammanahalli Main Road New Link 
vi. Development of Railway Underpass to connect 9th Main and 7th Cross 
Road 
vii. Development of Connection between Kempapura Main Road to 
Thanisandra Main Road to Hennur Main Road (via Manyata Tech Park) 
c. Upgradation of Master Plan Roads  
i. Hennur Main Road/ 80Ft Road/ Hennuru Bagaluru Main Road  
ii. Tannery Road, Arabic Collage Road, Nagawara Road and Thanisandra 
Main Road  
iii. Kammanahalli Main Road  
d. Junction Improvement Programme: 
i. Doddi Junction (near Slaughter House)  
ii. Periyar Nagar Circle (intersection of five roads namely – Tannery Road, 
Arabic Collage Road, Shampura Main Road, Deverjeevanhalli Main Road 
and 8th Cross Road)  
iii. Intersection of Arabic Collage Road and 9th Main Road 
iv. Intersection of Arabic Collage Road and 1st Main Road (Dodanna Layout) 
v. Intersection of Arabic Collage Road and Dr. Ambedkar Collage Road 
vi. Govindapura Cross 
vii. Nagawara Cross  
viii. Intersection of Three Roads on Jayamahal Road (Nandidurga Road, 
Jayamahal Road, JC Nagar Main Road) 
ix. Intersection of JC Nagar Main Road and Dinnur Main Road 
x. Veeranapalya Junction (ORR) 
xi. Intersection of Dinnur Main Road and KHB Colony Main road 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
9-12 
xii. Moto Junction  
xiii. LR Bande Bus Stop Junction (Near KPTCL Power Sub-Station)  
xiv. Intersection of Hennur Main Road Flyover Road with 1st Main Road  
xv. Intersection of Hennur Road and Nehru Road 
xvi. Kammanahalli Circle  
xvii. Kullappa Circle 
xviii. Babusapalya Circle  
xix. CMR Circle 
xx. Kalyananagara Circle (ORR) 
xxi. Hennur Cross Circle  
xxii. Intersection of Mar Thimotheus Street and Hennur Bagaluru Main Road 
xxiii. Intersection of 2nd Main Road (Bharat Nagar) and Thanisandra Main 
Road 
xxiv. Intersection of Oil Mill Road and Hennur Main Road at Lingrajpuram 
xxv. IŶteƌseĐtioŶ of HeŶŶuƌ MaiŶ ‘oad ǁhiĐh ďifuƌĐates iŶto ϴϬ͛ ‘oad aŶd 
Kacharkanahalli Main Road 
2. Development of Public Transport System:  
a. Namma Metro:  
i. Outer Ring Road 
ii. Gottigere – Nagawara – International Airport Link  
b. Mono Rail Link: Inner Peripheral Ring Road   
c. BRTS 
d. Bus Station: Thanisandra Main Road  
3. Development of Intermodal Interchange Stations  
a. Nagawara Interchange, 
b. Thanisandra Interchange ,  
c. Kalyan Nagar 
4. Preparation of Traffic Management Plan:  
a. Hennur Main Road  
b. Nagawara Main Road 
c. Arabic Collage Road 
d. CMR Road 
5. Accessibility Improvement Plans for stations and educational instituti ons. 
6. Preparation of Comprehensive Area Redevelopment and Creation Recr eational Facilities: 
a. Tannery Industrial Area 
b. Slaughter House  
c. SK Garden  
d. Ramaswamy Palya 
7. Preparation of Slum Redevelopment Plans 
8. Disaster & Hazard Mitigation Plan:  
a. Urban Flooding Mitigation Plan for Flood Prone Areas (to be determined by BBMP) 
b. Development of Mini-Fire Station areas within ORR 
9. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes and Streams:  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
9-13 
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification  of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Preparation of Lakes & Streams Rejuvenation Plan  for all lakes and streams within 
PD. 
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Surrounding Area development plan be prepared to upgrade the drainage and 
sewage infrastructure to stop flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as 
dumping of SWM.  
10. Development of Physical Infrastructure/ Facilities: 
a) SWM Dry Waste Collection Centre:   33 Nos. 
b) SWM Organic Waste Collection Centre:  04 Nos 
c) SWM Aggregator:    01 Nos 
d) SWM Central Processing Unit:   01 Nos 
e) Sewage Treatment Plant:    01 Nos 
f) 220kV Sub-station:    01 Nos 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
10-1 
10. PD 09: BANSAWADI – HORAMAVU 
 
1. The PD comprises of 4 wards namely Horamavu (25), Ramamurthy Nagar (26), Banasawadi  
(27), and parts of Hoodi ward (54) namely Byrathi Hoodi (54), Bileshivale  (Hoodi) (54) and 
Jinkethimmanahalli (Hoodi) (54).  
2. Outer Ring Road, Hennur Main Road, Hormavu/ Kalkere Main road, Dodda Bansawadi Main 
Road, Avalahalli Main Road are some of the major arterial roads forming the connect ivity 
network within the planning district.  
3. Planned layouts like HBR Layout, OMBR Layout, dense areas of Ramamurthy Nagar, 
unplanned residential layouts, commercial developments along the major roads, pres ence of 
large lakes and flood prone areas, undetermined internal network, etc define the spatial 
characteristics of PD.  
4. The PD has huge potential to accommodate additional population and at the same time 
redevelopment/ upgradation of certain areas is seen required.  
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography 
5. As per Census 2011, PD has 2,31,647 inhabitants, with a high decadal growth rate of 137.1% 
from 2001(97,693). There are 1,02,366 (44.2%) resident workers which is slight ly lower than 
the BMA average of 44.5%.  
6. There are 48,595 households (2011), with an average household size of 4.77,  which is higher 
than BMA (4.01). The gross density is 68 pph, whereas the average residential density is 
276.08 pph. The gross density is highest in Banasawadi Ward (148 pph) and l owest in Byrathi 
Hoodi and Jinkethimmanahalli Wards (13.6 pph). 
Population (2011 Census): 2,31,647  
Area of PD: 34.06 sqkm (3406.8 ha) 
Wards in PD: 4 
Gross Density (2011 Census): 68 pph 
 
Banaswadi – Hormavu Planning 
District ( PD No. 9) is located in the 
north-eastern side of BBMP. The PD is 
mainly residential in character with 
further potential for development due 
to the availability of large tracks of 
vacant land. The PD is characterised 
by planned residential 
neighbourhoods within the ORR, rapid 
unplanned developments in extended 
BBMP areas , and presence of 
educational institutions and large 
lakes.  
 
RMP2031 proposes development of 
defined circulation network, further 
densification, environment protection 
and creation of parks and open 
spaces.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
10-2 
Industry and Commerce 
7. There is no major employment centre or Industrial Area within the PD however, there are 
several small and medium sized industrial units which are scattered and spread across the PD 
and they together account for 0.91%. The commercial land uses account for 3.04 % which is 
predominantly commercial bands along the major roads like TC Palya Main Road,  
Ramamurthy Nagar Main Road, Kalkere Main Road, etc.  
Existing Land Use 
8. This PD offers huge potential for future densification as 52% of PD area is vacant, whil e 
residential accounts for 25%. It is important to that the vacant use is not conti guous to plan 
for Greenfield developments, however do offer and opportunity for improved circulation 
network and planned developments. The Industrial use and commercial use accounts for  
5.8% and 3.8% respectively. Figure 10-1 and Table 10-1 presents the existing land use map 
2015 and existing land use area statement for Planning District respectively.  
Figure 10-1: PD 09 Existing Land Use Map 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
10-3 
Table 10-1: PD 09 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 845.84 24.83 
Commercial 103.00 3.02 
Industrial 31.08 0.91 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 2.05 0.06 
Public Semi Public 97.85 2.87 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 11.91 0.35 
Parks & Open Spaces 26.28 0.77 
Transport Communication 344.87 10.12 
Vacant 1774.30 52.08 
Agriculture 0.00 0.00 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 10.04 0.29 
Water Bodies 159.71 4.69 
Total 3406.94 100.00 
 
Housing and Slums 
9. Residential land uses account for 24.81% as per the existing land use 2015. The PD  has both 
planned and unplanned layouts as well as large residential apartments. The built character is  
mainly low rise-low dense. Most of the layouts are gated communities whi le everything 
outside of these large enclaves have developed organically.  
10. There are 23 slums located within 4 wards of the PD, out of which 2 notified. Maximum slums 
are seen within Horamavu Ward. 
Traffic and Transportation 
11. BMTC buses are the only major forms of public transport available within PD,  while autos, 
cabs act as feeder services. There is two Bus Stands – one at Kalyananagara on Outer ring 
Road and other in Hormavu on Kalkere Main Road. The Outer Ring Road Metro link i s 
scheduled to be implemented by BMRCL.  
12. Outer Ring Road, Hennur Main Road, Hormavu/ Kalkere Main road/ Channasandra Mai n 
‘oad, Dodda BaŶsaǁadi MaiŶ ‘oad, Aǀalahalli MaiŶ ‘oad, ELU͛s ‘oad, ‘aŵaŵuƌthǇ Nagaƌ 
Main Road, K Narayanapura Main Roads, Hormavu Agara Main Road, Jayanti Nagar Main 
Road, Market Road, TC Palya Main Road form the connectivity network w ithin the planning 
district. However, the internal network is highly fragmented and undetermined.  
13. A Railway Line (Yelahanka to KR Puram) within City is passing through the PD , however there 
is no railway station on this line within PD.  
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
14. As per BWSSB, about 30% of the households have metered water supply connecti ons while 
15% of the households have metered sewage & sanitation connections and the work on 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
10-4 
extending water supply network and sewage network is being implemented. The Existin g 
BWSSB infrastructure located in the PD are:  
a. Ground Level Reservoirs at OMBR Layout-1 (15.91 ML), OMBR Layout- 2 (13.64 
ML ), HRBR Layout (4.55 ML) and RM Nagar(2.75 ML).  
b. Sewage Treatments Plants at Raja Canal Bhairathi Amanikhane (40 MLD     
c. Pumping Stations at HBR, Kalyan Nagar (75 HP), HRBR (125 HP) and OMBR 
Bhuvanagiri (100 HP). 
d. Also a 20 MLD STP is under construction between Kalkere Lake and Horamavu 
Agara Lake. 
15. There are 3 DWCCs for waste management. There is one 66 KV Sub Station is located withi n 
the PD. There is one fire station located in Banaswadi.  
16. There are 80 schools located in the PD. The main schools include Bangalore Inte rnational 
sĐhool, St. MaƌǇ͛s High sĐhool, St. MiĐhael͛s, LegaĐǇ High sĐhool to Ŷaŵe a feǁ. Health 
facilities within PD include 13 hospitals with a total of 296 beds in the PD, out o f which 12 are 
private hospitals and 1 is a government hospital.  
Lakes and Drainage 
17. The PD area falls under the larger catchment of Hebbal – Yella Mallappa Chetty Kere and 
Kalkere and Rampura Kere are the large lakes falling in this catchment within PD. As pe r 
revenue village maps there are 7 lakes/ kere fully within PD, namely – KalKere (the biggest 
one), Hormavu Agara Kere, Hormavu Kere, Chelakere, Banaswadi Kere, Nagareshwara 
Naganahalli Lake, and Varanashi Lake and 2 lakes/ keres partly with PD, namely – Rampura 
Kere and Gangadhar Kere.  
18. Chala kere, Bansawadi Kere and Gangadhar Kere have been partly breached. While 
Banaswadi Kere is developed as park and has developments within, whereas Chala Kere and 
Gangadhar kere are partly breached due to developments.   
19. There are several areas/ localities that are low lying and prone to flooding. Vaddara P alya 
near Hennur Bande, Hennur Main Road, Rail Over Bridge (on Hennur Main Road) a t 
Geddalahalli, Banaswadi, Hoysalanagara, are some of the areas prone to flooding.  
Park and Open Spaces 
20. There are few layout level parks and open spaces within the PD, which account for 0.77% of 
total area of planning district. Thus there is a need to plan for more neighbourhood level and  
regional level parks. 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: CIRCULATION NETWORK DEVELOPMENT FOR PLANNED DEVELOPMENT, 
DENSIFICATION, ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND CREATION OF CITY LEVEL PARKS & OPEN 
SPACES 
PROPOSALS 
1. The availability of large amount of vacant spaces in the PD provides an op portunity for 
planned development leading to further densification while integrating the exis ting 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
10-5 
development and provide for required infrastructure and facilities. Thus, the guidin g 
principles for this planning district are as following: 
a. Development of Circulation Network while integrating existing developments 
b. Development of Public Transport Infrastructure to increase the share of public 
transport and Transit Oriented Development.  
c. Optimal use of potential areas for further densification 
d. Protection and Conservation of Lake System and Flood Protection 
e. Development of Large Park and Open Spaces  
f. Redevelopment/ upgradation of congested areas/ slums 
2. The Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use Distribution for the PD are depicted in 
Figure 10-2 and Table 10-2 respectively.  
Figure 10-2 PD 09 Proposed Land Use Map 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
10-6 
Table 10-2: PD 09 Proposed Land Use Area Statement  
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 2103.92 75.18 
Commercial 59.45 2.12 
Industrial 8.39 0.30 
Public & Semi Public 85.71 3.06 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 16.18 0.58 
Parks / Open Spaces 152.75 5.46 
Transport & Communication 495.15 17.69 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 10.44 0.37 
Water Bodies 126.33 4.51 
NGT Buffer 348.61 12.46 
Total Developable Area 3406.94 121.74 
Agriculture 
 - 
Total PD Area 3406.94 - 
 
3. RMP2031 proposed city level public transport infrastructure like CRS, Metro and Mono Rail 
are running along roads within the Planning District. 
a. Metro ORR Link: It is proposed to develop metro link along Outer Ri ng Road and with 
2 stations within this PD – namely a) Kalyan Nagar BMTC Bus Depot, and b) Near 
Hormavu Signal, then leading to Ramamurthy Junction (Integration with 
Channasandra Railway Station) in PD 10.  
b. Metro PRR Link: It is proposed to develop metro link along proposed PRR a t city level 
and one station at Byrathi Bande is falling within the PD.   
c. LRT/ MONO RAIL/ B RT : The LRT/ MONO RAIL/ BRT around Inner Peripheral Ring 
Road passes through the PD and it is proposed to develop station at Thanisan dra and 
Rachenahalli (Intersection of Rachenahalli Main road and IPRR)  
d. BRT on Intermediate Ring Road : BRT is proposed along Hennur Main Road, from 
Intermediate Ring Road at Pottery Road towards Bagalur.  
4. Intermodal Interchange Stations are proposed to be developed at 3 locations – a) Kalyan 
Nagar b) Geddalahalli and c) Byrathi Bande  
5. Transit Oriented Development Zone is proposed to be applicable around all metro/ Mono Rail 
stations/ terminals/ interchanges located outside ORR i.e in Planning Zone B.  
6. In order to improve last mile connectivity and extend the public transport sy stem to 
neighborhood level it is proposed to develop two BMTC Bus Terminal  and 4 Bus Stations 
across PD.  
7. To improve the accessibility to Public Transport Stations (Metro, Mono, BMTC  Bus Stations 
and CRS Railway Stations) and Educational Institutes, it is proposed to strengthen the existing 
road network by providing footpaths and cycle tracks (wherever feasible).  
8. To improve the road network within the City it is proposed to develop Peripheral Ring Road, 
Inner Peripheral Ring Road, both passing through the planning district. The RMP2 031 has 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
10-7 
developed a grid pattern based road network within the PD integrating existing  development 
and assigned the hierarchy to the Master Plan road network. Peripheral Ring Road, Outer 
Ring Road, Inner PRR, Hennur Main Road, K Narayanapura Main Road (connectin g Bellary 
Road to Hennuru Main road), Hormavu/ Kalkere Main road/ Channasandra Main Road , 
Dodda BaŶsaǁadi MaiŶ ‘oad, Aǀalahalli MaiŶ ‘oad, ELU͛s ‘oad, ‘aŵaŵuƌthǇ  Nagaƌ MaiŶ 
Road, Hormavu Agara Main Road, Jayanti Nagar Main Road, Market Road, TC Paly a Main 
Road have been designated as Major Roads within the PD and are proposed to develo ped/ 
upgraded on priority.   
9. The RMP2031 has identified few existing roads for augmentation within the Planni ng district 
for ease of traffic movement. 
10. The RMP2031 has identified 19 critical junctions for geometric improvements f or better and 
smooth traffic flow and to be taken up on priority.  
11. The natural drainage between Rachenahalli Kere and Kal Kere and Rampura Lake is cl assified 
as Primary whereas an existing stream from Horamavu Lake and existing stream from 
Nagareshwara Naganahalli Lake meeting Kal Kere Lake are classified as Secondary Stream by 
the RMP2031, as these streams caters to large areas. The RMP2031 proposes that these 
streams have to be kept free of all encumbrances, sludge, SWM, and no sewage  allowed  to 
flow into the streams and lakes. It is also proposed that all lakes  be properly interco nnected 
and rejuvenated. The RMP2031 also proposes rejuvenation of all lakes within the planning 
district.  
12. The valley system between Kal Kere and Rampura Kere is proposed to be developed as a 
Regional Park . The land use therefore assigned is for open spaces in the Propose Land Use 
Plan 2031. This will help to retain the natural flow between Kal Kere and Rampura Lake while 
providing open space for the entire city. The roads adjoining the region al park mandatorily to 
be designed considering the water flows and with the provision of pedestrian and non-
motorised transport. Further, aforestation is proposed be done within the Regional Park, this 
will help improve green cover within the city.  
13. There are 23 slums (both notified and non-notified) within the PD. The maximum  numbers of 
slums (13 out of 23) are in Hormavur ward. It is important to provide the existing slums with 
better infrastructure services and living conditions and hence the RMP2031 pro poses 
redevelopment of the slums.  
14. In order to cater to present and future infrastructure requirements, the RMP2031 proposes 
development STP at Kalkere, and KR Puram-2, one 220kv power sub-station, and addi tional 6 
DWCCs, 1 OWCCs, and 1 Aggregator, for solid waste management within the plannin g 
district.  Also one Fire Station is proposed to be developed within the Planning District.  
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD 9: Banswadi -Hormavu. 
1. Road Development Plan 
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Category - 1 
Roads and other roads in phased manner.   
i. Peripheral Ring Road  
ii. Inner Peripheral Ring Road  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
10-8 
iii. Hennur – Bagaluru Main Road,  
iv. K Narayanapura Main Road (connecting Bellary Road to Hennuru Main road)  
v. Hormavu Main Road/ KalKere Main Road/ Channasandra Main Road. 
b. Upgradation of Master Plan Roads  
i. Avalahalli Main Road 
ii. Ramamurthy Nagar Main Road,  
iii. Hormavu Agara Main Road,  
iv. Jayanti Nagar Main Road,  
v. Market Road,  
vi. TC Palya Main Road 
vii. Hennur Main Road/ 80Ft Road/ Hennuru Bagaluru Main Road  
c. Junction Improvement Programme: 
i. Hormavu Junction (Intersection of ORR and Horamavu Main Road),  
ii. Redevelopment of Ramamurthy Nagar Junction by construction of sleep road/ 
flyover (Intersection of ORR and RamamurthyNagar Main Road) 
iii. Chikka Gubbi Cross (Intersection of Hennur Road with K Narayanapura Road),  
iv. K Narayanapura Cross 
v. Geddalahalli 
vi. Byrathi Cross  
vii. Byrathi Bande Junction 
viii. Ramamurthy Nagar Police Station Junction 
ix. Yaranapalya 
x. Intersection of Old UCO bank road and Ramamurthy Nagar Main road  
xi. Alada Mara Ramamurthy Nagar 
xii. Holy Family Church Junction 
xiii. Raghavendra Circle 
xiv. Intersection of Thambu Chetty Palya Main road and 3rd Main Road 
xv. Kalkere Cross 
xvi. Koudenahalli Cross 
xvii. Kyalasanahalli Junction 
xviii. Bileshivale Junction 
xix. Channasandra Junction (Intersection of Avalahalli Main Road and Channasandra 
Main Road) 
2. Development of Public Transport System:  
a. Namma Metro:  
i. Outer Ring Road 
ii. Periheral Ring Road   
b. Mono Rail Link Inner Peripheral Ring Road   
c. Bus Terminal 
i. Hennur Main Road (near Geddalahalli Railway Line) and  
ii. Peripheral Ring Road (as demarcated) 
d. Bus Stations – As demarcated in PLU Map 
3. Development of Multimodal Interchange Stations  
d. Kalyan Nagar (Metro + BMTC+ IPT).  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
10-9 
e. Geddalahalli (to developed as Interchage with Mono Rail on Inner PRR and BMTC bus 
terminal),  
f. Byrathi Bande (interchange with PRR Metro) 
4. Development of Regional Park  
a. Development of Ramamurthy Nagar Ward between Kal Kere and Rampura Kere (as 
demarcated in PLU Map) 
5. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes and Streams:  
d. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification of 
the RMP2031 .  
e. Preparation of Lakes & Streams Rejuvenation Plan : 
a. Master Plan Streams Rejuvenation Plan 
b. Kal Kere Rejuvenation Plan  
c. Rampura Lake Rejuvenation Plan 
d. Hormavu Agara Kere Rejuvenation Plan  
e. Chelakere Rejuvenation Plan  
f. Banaswadi Kere  
g. Nagareshwara Naganahalli Lake  
h. Varanashi Lake  
f. Preparation of Rehabilitation and Resettlement Plans for Lake Rejuvnicati on 
a. Hormavu Kere Rejuvenation and Rehabilitation/ Resettlement Plan  
b. Gangadhar Kere Rejuvenation and Rehabilitation/ Resettlement Plan 
g. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Surrounding Area development plan be prepared to upgrade the drainage and 
sewage infrastructure to stop flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as 
dumping of SWM.  
6. Preparation of Slum Redevelopment Plans. 
7. Disaster & Hazard Mitigation Plan 
c. Development of Fire Station in Hormavu Ward. 
8. Development of Physical Infrastructure/ Facilities: 
g) SWM Dry Waste Collection Centre:   06 Nos. 
h) SWM Organic Waste Collection Centre:  04 Nos 
i) SWM Aggregator:    01 No. 
j) Sewage Treatment Plant:    02 Nos 
k) 220kV Sub-station:    01 No.  
l) Fire Station     01 No. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
11-1 
11. PD 10: KR PURAM - HOODI 
 
1. There are a total of 6 wards within the PD which are, Vijinapura (51), K.R Puram (52), 
Basavanapura (53), Hoodi (54), Devasandra(55) and A Narayanpura(56). Hoodi ward has f our 
different spatial locations and only the main hoodi ward has been included in these PD. Rest 
three parts of Hoodi ward are adjacent to Ramamurthy Nagar (Ward 25) and Horamavu 
(Ward 26) falling in Planning District 9. 
2. Old Madras Road, SH 35, Outer Ring Road, ITPL Main Road, Kodigehalli Main Ro ad, 
Kodigehalli – Sadarmangala Road are some of the major arterial roads forming the 
connectivity network within the planning district. The metro phase 1 extension to Whitefield 
is currently under implementation.   
3. PD is characterised by the presence of Indian Telephone Industry (ITI), ITI Ancillary Ind ustrial 
Estate, SAIL, ITPL, Phoenix Mall, Hoodi 400/220kV receiving station, Sri  Sathya Sai Institute of 
Higher Learning, KR Puram Railway Station, several unplanned residential areas, High Rise  
Developments along ITPL Road, presence of several lakes.  
4. The PD has huge potential to accommodate additional population and at the same time 
redevelopment/ upgradation of certain areas is seen required.  
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography 
5. As per Census 2011, PD has 2,19,837 inhabitants, which has increased by 56.77% from 2 001 
(140231). There are 92,774 (42.20%) resident workers which is lower than the BMA average 
Population (2011 Census): 2,19,837  
Area of PD: 27.65 sqkm (2765.94 ha) 
Wards in PD: 6 
Gross Density (2011 Census): 79.5 pph 
 
KR Puram - Hoodi Planning District is 
located on eastern side of BBMP next to 
existing Employment Centre – EPIP 
(PD11) and Proposed Special 
Development Zone along Old Madras 
Road (PD 23). The PD is characterised by 
presence of Public Sector Enterprise , IT 
Companies, Industrial Areas, Markets, 
High Rise Developments, several 
unplanned residential areas and several 
lakes. PD has potential for development 
due to the availability of large tracks of 
vacant land (approximately 25 %).  
 
RMP2031 proposes development of 
defined circulation network, further 
densification, and environment 
protection.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
11-2 
of 44.5%. There are 64240 households (2011), with Avg. Household size being 3 .42, which is 
much lower than BMA (4.01).  
6. Gross Density is 79.5 pph while the Net Residential Density is 329 pph. The gross density  is 
highest in Vijinapura, which is 225 pph (followed by A.Nrayanapura) ward and least in  Hoodi 
ward (~14 pph).  
Industry and Commerce 
7. Industrial land uses account for 6.91% of total PD area. Government of India established the 
first PSU Indian Telecom Industries Limited, also known as ITI, in 1948, at Bengal uru near KR 
Puram railway station, which lead to development of ITI Industrial Estate at Mahadevapura . 
This was followed by series of developments by Government in Diesel Loco shed, SA IL 
godown, FCI godown, Silk factory, ITI Industrial estate, KIADB industrial estates (outside PD 
but in adjoining PD), Indian Oil depot, etc. With the development of Tin Facto ry, ITPB, EPIP (in 
adjoining PD), IT parks/ IT company offices, within the PD were developed, and in parallel, 
the developments grew along the OMR. There are couple of defence establishments also 
within the PD. Also KR Puram houses a large number of small scale industri es creating a large 
number of jobs for unskilled labourers.  
8. Commercial land uses account for 4.65% as per the existing land use 2015. Mo dern 
Commercial establishment like malls and traditional vegetable market as well as Fish mark et 
co exists in the PD. Kodigehalli main road is fully commercialised road withi n the PD with 
several establishments and shops. In addition, several educational and research institutes are 
employing several people. PD is thus among the major employer in the city. 
Existing Land Use 
9. This PD offers good potential for future densification as 25% of PD area is still v acant, while 
residential accounts for 25%. It is important to that the vacant use is not conti guous to plan 
for Greenfield developments. The Industrial use and commercial use accounts for 6.9% an d 
4.6% respectively. Figure 11- 1 and Table 11-1 presents the existing land use map 2015 and 
existing land use area statement for Planning District respectively.  
Figure 11-1: PD 10 Existing Land Use Map  
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
11-3 
Table 11-1: PD 10 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 668.12 24.16 
Commercial 128.60 4.65 
Industrial 191.06 6.91 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 102.40 3.70 
Unclassified 14.59 0.53 
Public Utility 39.65 1.43 
Parks & Open Spaces 61.69 2.23 
Transport Communication 319.25 11.54 
Vacant 1109.21 40.10 
Agriculture 0.00 0.00 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 5.75 0.21 
Water Bodies 125.60 4.54 
Total 2765.93 100.00 
 
Housing and Slums 
10. Residential land uses account for 24.16% as per the existing land use 2015. Th e Planning 
District is characterised by planned public sector residential layout and highly unorganised 
private residential layouts. ITI Township is well planned residential layouts, while most of the 
layouts are highly un- organised and disconnected to each other. The residential 
development in part of the city has plotted developments, single building apartments and 
multi-storey apartments. Some of the important localities being Vijnapura, Basavanapura, 
Dyavasandra, Ayyappa Nagar, Hoodi, Manjunath Layout, etc.  
11. Around 13% of the resident population within the PD are living within slums,  which is almost 
3 times the BMA average of 4.7%. There are 27 slums out of which 5 slums are no tified. KR 
Pura ward has the maximum slums within it with 6 slums.  
Traffic and Transportation 
12. Transport and Communication land uses account for 11.54% of PD area. Major arterial roads 
within the PD are Old Madras Road, ITPL Main Road, Outer Ring Road, and SH 35 while other  
roads include Ramamurthy Nagar Road, A Narayanapura road, Kodigehalli Road, Hoodi Main 
Road, Basavanapura Road, Sadaramangala Road, etc.  
13. Krishnarajapuram is one of the important railway stations on the Bengaluru Chennai railway  
line. KR Puram Bridge & Tin Factory Junction is one of the most critical  junctions in the city 
that attract heavy traffic congestion in the form of regional as well as local traffic. There is a 
need of integration of transport functions (Metro, Railways, Bus and vehicular mo vement) as 
well as junction design to ease the traffic movement.  
14. Namma metro has proposed Baiyappanahalli to ITPL – Whitefield (Phase 1 EW extension line) 
connecting Whitefield, with 13 stations. Two stations – Jyothipuram and KR Puram station s 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
11-4 
are closely located at are within the KR Puram/Tin Factory Junction. This offers an 
opportunity to integrate Krishnarajapuram railway station, with Namma Metro, BMTC Bu s 
and Intermediate public transport. Also extension of Metro to Hoskote in  future, if required. 
There are two BMTC depots in Durvani Nagar. 
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
15. As per BWSSB, the water supply network is ~ 393 km in length, whereas sewerage network 
length is about 93 km. About 21% of water connections to households are metered and 21% 
of households have sanitation connections. The Existing BWSSB infrastructure located in th e 
PD are:  
 There are existing Ground Level Reservoirs Existing at Hoodi and A. Narayanpura (4 
ML). 
 There are existing sewage treatment plants at Yellamallappachetty, Medahalli village, 
Hobli-Bidarhalli (15 MLD), near Geddahalli (40 MLD) and near Tambuchetti Palya 
Road (20 MLD). 
 An Intermediate Sewage Pumping Station exists at Sadaramangala, K.R. Puram Hobli 
with a capacity of 5 MLD Existing. 
16. As per BBMP there a ƌe Ϯ DWCC͛s foƌ ŵaŶageŵeŶt of solid ǁaste. As peƌ KPTCL, Hoodi 
400/220kv sub-station is major receiving station that supplies power to Ban galore. In 
addition there are 3 no of 220 KV power stations and 2 of 66 KV po wer stations located 
within the PD.  
17. There are around 108 schools and number of educational and research institution s such as 
the Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Lowry Advenist College, Shriram Institute  
for Industrial Research, Sri Satya Sai Institute for Higher Learning, SJES Collage, Kritsu Jyoti 
College, etc. Further, there are 3 Government Health Centres & Hospitals and 11 private 
hospitals/ health centres, with a total of 362 beds are present in PD, which seems to be 
inadequate for the present population. 
18. There is o ne fire station at Mahadevapura, one police station, one traffic police station and  
Regional Transport Commissioner Office. There is no burial ground in the PD. 
Lakes and Drainage 
19. The PD area falls under the larger catchment of Hebbal – Yella Mallappa Chetty Kere. K R 
Puram Kere (also known as Vengaiah Kere), Dyavasandra Kere, Yellammappa Chety kere 
(part), Kodigehalli Lake, Beniganahalli Lake, B.Narayanapura kere, Kalu Kunta, Mahadevapura 
kere (Part), Chikkabasavanapura kere, Hoodi Lake, Sadarmangala kere, Bhatarahalli kere,  
Basavanapura kere, Koudenahalli kere, and Seegehalli Kere are located in this PD.  Some of 
the lakes have been lost (in part or fully) to developments, which include Koudenahal li kere 
(part), Ramamurthynagara kere (part), Bhatarahalli (part) and Vijanapura (fully).  
20. There are several low lying areas within the planning districts which includes Ramamu rthy 
Nagar, Vijanapura, south of Dyavasandra kere at K.R. Puram, east of ITI colony next to the K R 
Puram kere, Vinayaka Nagar, Krishna Nagar (both to the south of Old Madras Road), 
Bhadarappa layout, etc. 
Park and Open Spaces 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
11-5 
21. Within the ITI there is Jawaharlal Nehru Park, ITI Park, Dr. Ambedkar Stadium, ITI Ground, 
and one multipurpose ground near EPFO office. However, there are no publi c spaces within 
the plotted residential developments. 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: CIRCULATION NETWORK DEVELOPMENT FOR PLANNED DEVELOPMENT, 
DENSIFICATION, ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND CREATION OF CITY LEVEL PARKS   
PROPOSALS 
15. As majority of the PD is already developed in a rather haphazard manner, the RMP2 031 aims 
at directing the growth towards planned development while integrating the existing  
developments through planned circulation network. The RMP2031 also aims at 
redevelopment of existing dense/ unplanned areas and environmental protection. Thus, the 
guiding principles for this planning district are as following: 
a. Development of Circulation Network while integrating existing developments 
b. Development of Public Transport Infrastructure to increase the share of public 
transport and Transit Oriented Development.  
c. Optimal use of potential areas for further densification 
d. Protection and Conservation of Lake System and Flood Protection 
e. Development of Large Park and Open Spaces  
f. Redevelopment/ upgradation of congested areas/ slums 
16. The Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use Distribution for the PD are depicted in 
Figure 11-2 and Table 11-2 respectively.  
Figure 11-2: PD 10 Proposed Land Use Map  
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
11-6 
Table 11-2: PD 10 Proposed Land Use Area Stateme nt 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 1328.62 48.04 
Commercial 81.70 2.95 
Industrial 178.92 6.47 
Public & Semi Public 97.07 3.51 
Unclassified 13.97 0.51 
Public Utility 34.64 1.25 
Parks / Open Spaces 121.23 4.38 
Transport & Communication 405.45 14.66 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 5.72 0.21 
Water Bodies 123.80 4.48 
NGT Buffer 374.79 13.55 
Total Developable Area 2765.92 100.00 
Agriculture 
 - 
Total PD Area 2765.93 - 
 
17. RMP2031 proposed city level public transport infrastructure like CRS, Metro and Mono Rail 
are running along roads within the Planning District. 
a. Commuter Rail Service (CRS): The RMP2031 proposes that CRS at regional level shall 
start/ terminate at the KR Puram Railway Station and integrated with city public 
transport network (Metro/ mono/ Bus). It is proposed that Channasandra Railway 
Station (near SAIL along ORR), Hoodi Halt, and Whitefield Stations are developed  for 
CRS.  
b. Metro ORR Link: It is proposed to develop metro link along Outer Ri ng Road and with 
4 stations within this PD – namely a) Ramamurthy Junction (Integration with 
Channasandra Railway Station), b) Joytipura (interchange with ORR and Phase 1 
Extension to Whitefield), c) KR Puram Interchange (integration with KR Puram 
Railway Station), and d) Mahadevapura ORR leading to DRDO complex.  
c. MONO RAIL / LRT/ BRTS : RMP2031 envisages Mono Rail / LRT / BRTS till Hoskote 
along OMR in the long term. However, within plan period it is proposed t o develop 
Metro link till Budigere cross (junction of Budigere Main road & OMR) where an  ISBT 
(Kondasapura) is proposed to be developed. Thereby shifting the KR Puram bus 
station (presently on KR Puram Bridge) to Budigere Cross (Kondasapura) on OMR  
18. Intermodal Interchange Stations are proposed to be developed at 3 locations – a) 
Channasandra  b ) Joytipura c) KR Puram), d) Medahalli, e) PRR Interchange  and f) ISBT 
Kondasapura.  
19. Transit Oriented Development Zone is proposed to be applicable around all metro/ Mono Rail 
stations/ terminals/ interchanges located outside ORR i.e in Planning Zone B.  
20. In order to improve last mile connectivity and extend the public transport sy stem to 
neighborhood level it is proposed to develop two BMTC Bus Stations are proposed to be 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
11-7 
developed within the PD. Both are in Hoodi Ward located at Kodigehalli and Kumbena 
Agrahara.  
21. To improve the accessibility to Public Transport Stations (Metro, Mono, BMTC  Bus Stations 
and CRS Railway Stations) and Educational Institutes, it is proposed to strengthen the existing 
road network by providing footpaths and cycle tracks (wherever feasible).  
22. The RMP2031 has identified new links roads for network augmentation within the P lanning 
district and some of the important links are: 
a) Extension of Ramamurthy Nagar Main Road to ITPL Main Road:  This is a critical link as it 
will divert traffic coming from Banaswadi/ Ramamurthy Nagar straight to Whitefield 
without entering KR Puram junction. The proposed Right of Way for this link 24 m.  
b) Development of Railway Vehicular Underpass: It is proposed to develop two vehicular 
underpass at following locations: 
i. Masjid Road (adjoining Kendriay Vidyalay) to connecting Devasandra Industrial 
Estate (ITI Ancillary Estate)  
ii. 1st Main Road Sadarmangala Industrial Estate (adjoining Prestige Shantiniketan) 
to Sadaramangala Road 
c) Widening of Hoodi Railway Overbridge: It is proposed to widen Hoodi Flyover on H oodi 
Main Road. 
Figure 11-3: PD 10 New Link Ramamurthy Nagar Main Road to ITPL Main Road 
 
 
23. The RMP2031 has identified 20 critical junctions to be taken up on priority for geometric 
improvements for better and smoother traffic flow  
Protection of Lakes and Drainage 
24. All lakes within PD except Benniganahalli kere falls under the larger catchment of  Hebbal – 
Yella Mallappa Chetty Kere, whereas Benniganahalli Kere falls under the larger catchm ent of 
Bellanduru – Varthuru Kere. The Natural Drainage within PD is classified as following:  

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
11-8 
a. Drainage connecting Gangadhar Kere – KR Puram Kere – Seegihalli Kere = Tertiary  
b. Drainage connecting Devasandra Kere – Seegihalli Kere = Tertiary  
c. Drainage connecting Chikka Devasandra – Seegihalli Kere = Tertiary  
d. Drainage connecting Seegihalli Kere to Yella Mallappa Chetty Kere = Secondary  
e. Drainage connecting Hoodi Lake – Sadaramangala Kere = Tertiary 
f. Drainage connecting Sadaramangala Kere to Primary Drainage = Secondary 
g. Drainage connecting Benniganahalli Kere to Dodda Nekundi Kere = Tertiary   
h. Other drains leading to lakes within this PD are classified as tertiary.  
25. The RMP2031 proposes that these streams  be kept free of all encumbrances, sludge, SWM, 
and no sewage be allowed to flow into the streams and lakes. It is also p roposed that all lakes 
hae to be properly interconnected and rejuvenated. The RMP2031 also proposes  
rejuvenation of all lakes within the planning district.  
 
26. Provision of Open Spaces:  In order to provide the parks and open spaces for Planning 
District, the RMP2031 proposes development of two large parks within the Planning  District 
at following locations:  
a. Basavanapura Ward between Seegihalli Kere and Basavanapura Kere (as demarcated 
in PLU Map) 
b. Hoodi Ward (near Mount Litera Zee School – as demarcated in PLU Map) 
Area Redevelopment 
27. Redevelopment of KR Puram Market Area and surrounding slums within KR Pu ra Ward:  The 
KR Puram market historically has been a farmers market or Santhe- which attracted far mers 
from the surrounding hinterland.  The KR Puram market area has a lot of vending activity 
spilling out onto the road. The idea of redevelopment of the market shall incl ude providing 
and upgrading all necessary facilities for proper functioning of the market and establishing 
appropriate access connections with its surrounding.  
28. Traffic and Transportation based Redevelopment of Tin-Factory – KR Puram Bridge Junction 
and ORR Junction : KR Puram Junction which is an extremely critical junction and witness the 
most congestion when compared with other junctions in the City, as several transport related 
activities are occurring – like Bus Stop, traffic merging, movement of regional and city traffic, 
railway station, cable bridge, and now Metro. The RMP2031 therefore proposes for traffic 
and transportation base redevelopment of Tin Factory – KR Puram Junction.  
29. Redevelopment of A. Narayanapura Ward:  Majority of A. Narayanapura Ward has developed 
very organically without any clear structure and has low accessibility.  The entire ward is 
proposed for redevelopment  
30. Slum Redevelopment: There are 27 slums (both notified and non-notified) within the PD . The 
maximum numbers of slums (6 out of 27) are in KR Puram ward. It is important to provide the 
existing slums with better infrastructure services and hence the RMP2031 proposes 
redevelopment of the slums.  
Provision Infrastructure and Utilities 
31. In order to cater to present and future infrastructure requirements, the RMP2031 proposes 
development STP at TC Palay Road, additional 10 DWCCs, 2 OWCCs, and 1 Aggregator, for  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
11-9 
solid waste management within the planning district. Also one Fire Station is prop osed to be 
developed within the Planning District.  
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD 10: 
1. Road Development Plan 
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Category - 1 
Roads (as listed in Annexure) and other roads in phased manner.   
b. Important New Links 
i. Extension of Ramamurthy Nagar Main road till ITPL Main Road (via ITI) 
ii. Extension of Basavanapura Main road to connect Medihalli – Kadugodi Main 
Road 
iii. New Link from Kodigehalli to Jr. Collage Road (passing adjacent to Mount 
Litera Zee School)) 
c. Upgradation/ Widening of Master Plan Roads  
i. Ramamurthy Nagar Main Road,  
ii. TC Palya Main Road 
iii. Basavanapura Main Road 
iv. Kodigehallli Main Road  
v. Medihalli – Kodigehalli Main Road  
vi. Ayyapanagar Batterahalli Main Road 
vii. Devasandra Main Road 
viii. Seegihalli Main Road  
ix. Hoodi Main Road 
x. Hoodi Sadarmangala Road 
d. Junction Improvement Programme: 
i.  Anandapura Junction  
ii. Intersection of TC Palya Main Road and Scared Heart Road 
iii. Intersection of TC Palya Main Road and KR Puram – TC Palya Bypass Road 
iv. Tambuchettipalya (Intersection of TC Palya Main Road and Kithanagur Main 
Road) 
v. Tambuchettipalya Gate- Hoskote Road Junction (Intersection of TC Palya 
Main Road and Old Madras Road) 
vi. Bhattarahalli Junction  
vii. Medahalli Junction 
viii. KR Puram Junction (Intersection of OMR and Devasandra Main Road) 
ix. Ayyappa Nagar Junction 
x. T-Junction of Kodigehalli Main road and Ayyappa Main Road (SEA Collage 
Arch) 
xi. Mahadevapura Junction (T Junction of ITPL Main road and Mahadevapura 
Main Road) 
xii. Hoodi Junction  
xiii. Intersection of Medihalli – Kadugodi Main Road and Seegihalli Main Road 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
11-10 
xiv. Seegihalli Junction 
xv. Basavanapura T Junction (Intersection of Ayyapanagar Batterahalli Main 
Road and Seegihalli Main Road) 
xvi. Intersection of Ayyapanagar Batterahalli Main Road and Basavanpura Main 
Road 
xvii. Intersection of Devasandra Main Road and Shani Mahatma Temple Road 
xviii. Intersection of Basavanpura Main Road and Shani Mahatma Temple Road 
xix. Intersection of Devasandra Main Road and Krishna Nagar Main Road 
xx. Intersection of Basavanpura Main Road and Krishna Nagar Main Road 
2. Development of Public Transport System:  
a. CRS Railway Stations 
i. Channasandra Railway Station 
ii. Hoodi Halt 
b. Namma Metro:  
i. Outer Ring Road 
ii. Peripheral Ring Road  
c. Mono Rail / LRT / BRTS : Inner Peripheral Ring Road  
d. Bus Stations  
i. Kodigehalli  (As demarcated in PLU Map) 
ii. Kumbena Agrahara 
3. Development of Multimodal Interchange Stations  
a. Channasandra  
b. KR Puram  
c. Medahalli  
d. PRR Interchange  
e. ISBT Kondasapura  
4. Development of Regional Park  
a. Development of Large Park in Basavanapura Ward between Seegihalli Kere and 
Basavanapura Kere  
b. Development of Park in Hoodi Ward  
5. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes and Streams:  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that missing links of lakes and 
streams within the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after 
notification of the RMP2031 .  
b. Preparation of Lakes & Streams Rejuvenation Plan : 
a. Master Plan Streams Rejuvenation Plan 
b. Yella Mallappa Chetty Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
c. Gangadhar Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
d. KR Puram Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
e. Seegihalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
f. Devasandra Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
g. Chikka Devasandra Rejuvenation Plan 
h. Hoodi Lake Rejuvenation Plan 
i. Sadaramangala Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
11-11 
j. Benniganahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan  
c. Preparation of Rehabilitation and Resettlement Plans for Lake Rejuvnicati on 
a. Gangadhar Kere Rejuvenation and Rehabilitation/ Resettlement Plan 
b. Byatarayanapura Lake Rejuvenation and Rehabilitation/ Resettlement Plan 
c. Kavudenahalli Lake Rejuvenation and Rehabilitation/ Resettlement Plan 
d. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Surrounding Area development plan be prepared to upgrade the drainage and 
sewage infrastructure to stop flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as 
dumping of SWM.  
6. Preparation of Slum Redevelopment Plans 
7. Development of Physical  bd Social Infrastructure/ Facilities: 
a) SWM Dry Waste Collection Centre:   10 Nos. 
b) SWM Organic Waste Collection Centre:  02 Nos 
c) Sewage Treatment Plant:    01 Nos 
d) Fire Station     01 Nos. 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
12-1 
12. PD 11: DODDA NEKKUNDI – WHITEFIELD 
 
1. Planning District comprises of four large BBMP wards, namely Gurudacharpalya (82) , 
Kadugodi (83). Hagadooru (84) and Doddanekkundi (85). 
2. It houses number of IT/ ITES/ Aerospace Companies in ITPB, KIADB Export Promotion 
Industrial Area, Bagamane Tech Park and other IT premises and has Dodde Nakundi Industrial 
Areas, Vishweshwarya Industrial Estates. The residential developments are mostly of high  
density and unplanned in nature. The PD has potential to accommodate additio nal 
population and at the same time redevelopment/ upgradation of certain areas is seen 
required.  
3. Outer Ring Road, ITPL Main Road, Old Airport Road/ Varthur Road, Road No. 2, Channasandra 
Main Road, SH35, Graphite India Main Road, Borewell Road, Nalluruhalli M ain Road are some 
of the major arterial roads forming the connectivity network within the planning  district. The 
metro phase 1 extension to Whitefield is currently under implementation.  
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography 
4. The population has more than doubled to 207212 (2011 census) with the 1 27.57% increase 
over 2001 population (91056). There are 96091 resident workers with a work fo rce 
participation of 46.37%, whereas total employment generated in the area is about 4 t o 5 
times the workers.  
5. There are 56050 households (2011), with Avg. Household size being 3.70, which is l ower than 
BMA (4.01). The gross density is 49 persons per hectare (pph), whereas the average 
Population (2011 Census): 2,07,212 
Area of PD: 42.38 sqkm (4238.4 ha) 
Wards in PD: 4 
Gross Density (2011 Census): 49 pph 
 
Dodda Nekkundi – Whitefield Planning 
District (PD No.11) is a major 
employment centre of Bengaluru city and 
located on the eastern edge of BMA. It is 
characterised by the presence of several 
IT/ITES/ Aerospace companies, Industrial 
Areas, Defence Areas, Malls and 
Commercial Places , Haphazard/ 
Unplanned Residential Areas, lack of 
public spaces and draws heavy traffic 
from all directions to PD. 
  
Master Plan aims at targeted growth the 
employment generation while promoting 
public transport and high density 
residential developments.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
12-2 
residential density is 226pph. The gross density is highest in Garudacharpalya ward (73 pph) 
and the least in Kadugudi ward (37 pph). 
Industry and Commerce 
6. Industrial land uses account for 9.04% of total area of planning district. The large IT/ ITES 
Companies and Business Houses in ITPB, KIADB Export Promotion Industrial Area, Bagmane 
Tech Park, Office Space along outer ring road, Brigade Metropolise and Presige S haniniketan, 
on ITPL Main Road, Industrial Areas like Doddanakundi, Sadarmangala, Devasandra, Kadug udi 
KSIIDC Industrial and Aerospace companies provide employment in both the IT/ITES, 
Manufacturing, Establishments and retails shops.  
7. Commercial land uses account for 2.76% of total area of planning district. Commercial activity 
is seen along Old Airport Main Road/ Varthur Road, Graphite India Main Road, AECS L ayout, 
SH 35, Borewell Main Road and Immadihalli Main Road. There are 6 Malls  and several small 
establishments which also provide employment with PD. Also, a small vegetabl e & fruit 
market is located along Sri Krishna Temple Road providing daily needs to local residents.  
Existing Land Use 
8. Figure 12-1and Table 12-1presents the existing land use map 2015 and existing land use 
area statement for Planning District respectively.  
 
Figure 12-1: PD 11 Existing Land Use Map  
 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
12-3 
Table 12-1: PD 11 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 955.06 22.53 
Commercial 116.80 2.76 
Industrial 381.08 8.99 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 177.00 4.18 
Unclassified 51.24 1.21 
Public Utility 7.19 0.17 
Parks & Open Spaces 64.71 1.53 
Transport Communication 366.17 8.64 
Vacant 1938.37 45.73 
Agriculture 0.00 0.00 
Forest 44.36 1.05 
Streams 8.44 0.20 
Water Bodies 127.93 3.02 
Total 4238.35 100.00 
Housing and Slums 
9. Residential land uses account for 21.55% of the existing land use 2015. The Plan ning District 
is characterised by haphazard residential areas, though there are few planned layouts like 
AECS Layout, BEML Layout and Jawahar Nagar Layout, rest of the residential area are 
haphazard and are either isolated.  The total number of households residing in residentia l 
areas of the PD are 56050 (Census 2011), with 207212 inhabitants.  
10. There are 20 slums in this PD covering 257 ha and having 24743 perso ns (11.94% to total 
population) residing in them. Out of 20 slums, 2 slums are notified slums while 18 are non-
notified. 
Traffic and Transportation 
11. Traffic and Communication land uses account for 8.69% of total extent of PD. At prese nt, 
Buses operated by BMTC and private companies (for their employees), cabs are the only  
modes that are available in this planning district, though proposed Metro Phase 1 extension 
to Whitefield is expected to improve public transport options further. There is only one BMT C 
TTMC/ Depot in the planning district area. Whitefield station on Indian railways i s the 
potential commuter station. The lack of public transport options has increased the pressure 
existing road network, which also cater to heavy vehicle traffic from CONCOR ICD  and 
regional traffic. Concor ICD, Sadarmangala goods terminal and FCI Godown all are the m ajor 
logistic infrastructure of the city. 
12. The critical arteries are ITPL Main Road, Old airport road/ Varthur Road, Graphite Ind ia Main 
Road, Kundanhalli gate main road, Hoddi Main Road, Outer Ring Road. Whereas critical 
junctions being Doddanakundi (near Bagamane Tech Park), Kundanahlli Gate, Hood y 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
12-4 
Junction, Graphite India Junction, ITPL Main gate, Hope Farm Junction, Varthur Kodi  Junction, 
Chanasandra FCI Road Junction. 
13. Whitefield TTMC/ Bus Station and Kadugodi Bus Station are two bus stations locate d within 
PD. 
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
14. As per BWSSB, only 8.5% of the households have metered water connection and 7% o f the 
household has access to sewage connections. The under implementation water suppl y and 
sewage project is expected to improve the water supply network coverage a nd sewerage 
network coverage in this area. There are 2 GLRs located at Graphite India with capaciti es of 
9ML and 12ML and a 60 MLD STP is located at Kadugodi. 
15. As per BBMP, there are 2 DWCCs and 1 OWC located in the PD, whereas as per KPTCL there 
are 3 no. of 66KV substations located in the PD. 
16. There are around 81 schools and various educational and research institutions such as the 
CMRIT, Shri Satyasai Institute for Higher Medical Studies, Forest Technical and Administrativ e 
Training Institute, etc. Further, there are 5 Government health centres & hospitals and 10 
private hospitals, with a total of capacity of 683 beds, which is more than adequate  for the 
present population. Some of the major hospitals are Vydehi Hospital, Satya Sai Hospital and 
Shankara Eye Hospital. 
17. There is one Cremation Ground at Nalluruhalli.  
Lakes and Drainage 
18. Seetharampalya Lake, Mahadevpura (Nakkundi) Lake, Shiddapura Lake (Thubarahall i Lake), 
Kundalahalli Lake, Nallurahalli Lake Doddanakundi Lake, Chinapanahalli lake , Hoodi Lake, 
Munekolala Lake (Achhana Lake), Patandur Agrahara lake, Sheelavanthakere Lake, Yelkgata 
Lake, and four dried lakes are present in Whitefield planning district. Out of four dried lakes - 
two lakes are in Mahadevapura Revenue Village, while one each in Chinnappanahall i and 
Dodda Nekkundi Revenue Village. All these lakes fall under Bellanduru Varthuru catchment 
area.  
19. There are several locations on ITPL main road, Patandur Agrahara, areas adjoining FCI 
Godown Road, Sadarmangala which are the low-lying areas and are flood prone.  
Park and Open Spaces 
20. Parks and Open Spaces account for 1.58% of the existing land use 2015. Kadugod i Plantation 
and Reserved Forest are two major open spaces available. Small parks within layouts are the 
only parks and open spaces available in this area. 
Heritage and Culture 
21. CSI memorial church and Whitefield club are the two built heritage in this part of the city, 
whereas Wetland- Valley system from Yella Mallappa Chetty Kere and Varthur Kere leading to 
Kelavarapelli Reservoir is the environmental heritage of the city present in plann ing district, 
which needs to be preserved. 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: TARGETED GROWTH, TOD, PUBLIC TRANSPORT INTEGRATION 
DENSIFICATION, REDEVELOPMENT, ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION, AND HERITAGE CONSERVATION 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
12-5 
PROPOSALS 
1. PD is a major employment centre and is expected to offer additional employment g oing 
forward. With the future expansion of economic activities within PD, it is expected to attract 
more traffic. Also, the PD is witnessing a haphazard and unplanned high density growth . The 
RMP2031 aims at targeted growth and facilitating planned development while integrating the 
existing developments through planned circulation network. The RMP2031 also ai ms at 
redevelopment of existing dense/ unplanned areas and environmental protection. Thus, the 
guiding principles for this planning district are as following: 
a. Target Growth through strategic allocation of Industrial and Commercial Use 
b. Development of Public Transport Infrastructure to increase the share of public 
transport  
c. Promote Transit Oriented Development around Metro Stations   
d. further densification by utilizing vacant lands 
e. Protection and Conservation of Lake System and Flood Protection 
f. Redevelopment/ upgradation of congested areas/ slums 
2. The Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use Distribution for the PD are depicted in 
Figure 12-2  and Table 12-2 respectively.  
Figure 12-2: PD 11 Proposed Land Use Map 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
12-6 
Table 12-2: PD 10 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 1752.55 44.13 
Commercial 93.20 2.35 
Industrial 511.03 12.87 
Public & Semi Public 193.01 4.86 
Unclassified 103.90 2.62 
Public Utility 9.55 0.24 
Parks / Open Spaces 163.00 4.10 
Transport & 
Communication 594.10 14.96 
Forest 57.93 1.46 
Streams 5.09 0.13 
Water Bodies 126.56 3.19 
NGT Buffer 361.60 9.10 
  0.00 
Total Developable Area 3971.50 100.00 
Agriculture 266.84 - 
Total PD Area 4238.35 - 
 
Traffic and Transportation 
3. RMP2031 proposed city level public transport infrastructure like CRS, Metro and Mono Rail 
are running along roads within the Planning District. 
a. Commuter Rail Service (CRS): The RMP2031 proposes that CRS at regional level wil l 
start/ terminate at the KR Puram Railway Station and integrated with city public 
transport network (Metro/ mono/ Bus). It is proposed that Whitefield Station is 
developed for CRS.  
b. Metro ORR Link: It is proposed to develop metro link along Outer Ri ng Road and with 
2 stations within this PD – namely a) Dodda Nekkundi, and b) ISRO leading to 
Marathahalli.  
c. Mono Rail / LRT/ BRTS Link 1: Trinity to Varthur: The proposed Trinity t o Varthur 
Mono Rail/ LRT / BRTS along Old Airport/ Varthur Road passess through the Plan ning 
District and it is proposed to develop stations at Kundalahalli Gate, Siddh apura, 
Ramagondanahalli, Varthur Kodi  
d. Mono Rail/ LRT/ BRTS Link: The proposed Mono Rail/ LRTS/ BRTS  around In ner 
Peripheral Ring Road passes through the PD and it is proposed to develop stati ons at 
a) Kadugodi (interchange with CRS, BMTC Kadugodi Bus Station & Whitefield Metro), 
b) Hope Farm, c) Whitefield Police Station, d) Whitefield, (Borewell Road Junctio n), d) 
Hagadur, and e) Varthur Kodi then leading to Varthur Village.  
4. Intermodal Interchange Stations are proposed to be developed at 2 locations – a) Kadugodi 
and b) Varthur Kodi  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
12-7 
5. Transit Oriented Development Zone is proposed to be applicable around all metro/ Mono Rail 
stations/ terminals/ interchanges located outside ORR i.e in Planning Zone B.  
6. To improve the accessibility to Public Transport Stations (Metro, Mono, BMTC  Bus Stations 
and CRS Railway Stations) and Educational Institutes, it is proposed to strengthen the existing 
road network by providing footpaths and cycle tracks (wherever feasible). It is propo sed that 
that area accessibility plans are prepared.  
7. The RMP2031 has identified new links roads and widening of certain road for network  
augmentation within the Planning district. 
Protection of Lakes and Drainage 
8. All lakes fall under the larger catchment of Bellanduru – Varthuru Kere. The important 
Natural Drainage within PD is classified as following and is details are presented in PLU Map:  
a. Drainage connecting Dodda Nekkundi Kere with Varthur Kere= Secondary 
b. Drainage connecting Chinnapanahalli Kere with Varthur Kere = Secondary 
c. Drainage connecting Kundalahalli Kere with Varthur Kere = Secondary 
d. Drainage connecting Sheelavanthakere Kere with Primary Drainage = Secondary 
e. Tertiary drains/ streams within PD and applicable buffers are shown in PLU Map.  
9. The RMP2031 proposes that these streams  be kept free of all encumbrances, sludge, SWM, 
and no sewage be allowed to flow into the streams and lakes. It is also proposed that all l akes  
be properly interconnected and rejuvenated. The RMP2031 also proposes rejuvenati on of all 
lakes within the planning district.  
10. Provision of Open Spaces:  In order to provide the parks and open spaces for Planning 
District, the RMP2031 proposes development of two large parks within the Planning  District 
at following locations:  
b. In Kadugodi ward near Kadugodi Colony in Kadugodi Plantation revenue v illage as 
demarcated in PLU Map. 
c. In Hagadur ward near Vijay Nagar in Nagondanahalli revenue village as demarcated 
in PLU Map. 
11. Area Redevelopment:  
 Redevelopment Existing Industrial Estates: The RMP2031 proposes that existing industrial  
areas within PD are taken up for redevelopment to accommodate the changing economy 
of Whitefield. Densification of these plots can happen to support the animation in dustry, 
tech start-ups, incubation centres, 3D printing and co-working spaces, IT/ITES/ etc. 
 Redevelopment of Garudacharpalya Vegetable Market: The RMP2031 proposes that 
Redevelopment of Garudacharpalya Vegetable Market and adjoin areas are taken up for 
redevelopment for provision of better infrastructure for Market Area and supply of  
additional EWS housing.  
 Redevelopment / Development of certain areas: The RMP2031 proposes that 
ƌedeǀelopŵeŶt/ upgƌatioŶ of gƌaŵthaŶ͛s of the ǀillages iŶĐluded to Đƌeate BBMP is 
undertaken in time bound manner to provide necessary infrastructure and facilities . 
12. Slum Redevelopment:  There are 20 slums (both notified and non-notified) within the PD and 
are devoid certain infrastructure and facilities. The RMP2031 proposes to provide the existing 
slums with better infrastructure services .  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
12-8 
13. Heritage Conservation of Whitefield Inner Circle: Whitefield developed as an Anglo-Indian 
village outside the city core. On 27 April 1882, His Highness, Chamaraja Wodeyar IX , the 
Maharaja of Mysore , granted 3,900 acres (16 km2) of land to the Eurasian and Anglo 
Indian  Association, Mysore and Coorg (E&AI) for the establishment of agricultural 
Settlements at Whitefield (then Mysore state). Many of the inhabitants were working at KGF 
at that time. The origin of the settlement was around the inner circle, a circular urban form- a 
self-sufficient community built in between two circlular roads . The architectural style seen 
here is mostly Colonial. Some of the important buildings are the CSI church and the 
Whitefield club. The RMP2031 proposes the conservation of Inner Circle and t herefore has 
delineated Inner Circle Heritage Zone for protection and conservation as per the provisions of 
Zoning Regulations. 
Figure 12-3: PD 11 Whitefield Inner Circle Heritage Zone 
 
Disaster and Hazard Management 
14. PD being major employment centre within Bengaluru, lakhs of people work in the smal l 
space. The city economy is dependent on safe working conditions. It is therefore important to 
have emergency plan prepared and executed for swift reactions during emergency situation.  
The RMP2031 therefore proposes that a Disaster and Hazard Mitigation Plan  be prepared.  
15. The RMP2031 proposes development of additional 8 DWCCs, 1 OWCCs, 1 Aggreg ator, and 1 
Bio – Methanation Unit for solid waste management within the planning district.  
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
12-9 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD 11: Dodda Nekkundi - Whitefield   
1. Road Development Plan 
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Category -1 ( 
above 18 m)  Roads  
b. Important New Links 
o Graphite India Road to Outer Ring Road 
o Varthur Kodi to ORR 
o Development of Flyover Near Rainbow Hospital on ORRv 
o Development of Railway Under Bridge at Chennapanhalli Main Roadv 
c. Widening/ Upgradation of Certain Roads: 
o Mahadevapura Main Road 
o Ghosala Road 
o Maheswaramma Temple Road 
o SriKrishna Temple Road 
o Alpine Eco Road 
o Nallurhalli Main Road 
o Borewell Road  
o Immedahalli Main Road 
o Pattandur Agrahara Road 
o ECC Ro ad 
o SGR Dental collage road 
o Munnekollal Main road 
d. Junction Improvement Programme: 
o  Mahadevapura Junction (T Junction of ITPL Main road and Mahadevapura Main 
Road) 
o Garudacharpalya Junction 
o ESI Junction (intersection of Graphite India Road  & ITPL Main road) 
o Hoodi Junction  
o Rajapalya Junction 
o Big Bazar Junction  
o Pattandur Agrahara Gate Junction 
o BPL Junction  
o Hope Farm Junction  
o Channasadnra Junction  
o Intersection of SH 35 and Immadahalli Main Road 
o Intersection of SH 35 and Borewell Road 
o Intersection of SH 35 and Hagadur Main Road 
o Varthur Kodi Junction 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
12-10 
o Siddhapura Junction (Intersection of Varthur Main Road and Nalluruhalli Main 
road) 
o Kundalahalli Gate Junction 
o Intersection of Graphite India main Road and 4th Main Road BEML Layout 
o AECS Layout Junction  
o Intersection of Graphite India main Road and Ryan School Road 
o Intersection of Graphite India main Road and 2nd Main Road Dodda Nekkundi 
Industrial Estate 
o Graphite India Junction (near RxDx Hospital) 
o Intersection of Nallurhalli Main Road and 2nd Main Road 
o Nallurhalli Junction (Intersection of Nallurhalli Main Road and Borewell Road) 
o Intersection of SGR Dental Collage Road and Munnekollal Main Road 
2. Development of Public Transport System:  
a. CRS Railway Stations 
i. Whitefield 
b. Namma Metro 
i. Outer Ring Road 
ii. Peripheral Ring Road  
c. Mono Rail Link – 1: Trinity to Varthur 
d. Mono Rail Link – 6: Inner Peripheral Ring Road  
3. Development of Multimodal Interchange Stations  
a. Kadugodi , and  
b. Varthur Kodi  
4. Development of Parks and Open Spaces 
a. In Kadugodi ward near Kadugodi Colony in Kadugodi Plantation revenue village as 
demarcated in PLU Map. 
b. In Hagadur ward near Vijay Nagar in  Nagondanahalli revenue village as demarcated 
in PLU Map. 
5. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes and Streams:  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Preparation of Lakes & Streams Rejuvenation Plan : 
a. RMP2031 Streams Rejuvenation Plan 
b. Dodda Nekkundi Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
c. Seetharampalya Lake Rejuvenation Plan,  
d. Mahadevpura (Nakkundi) Lake Rejuvenation Plan,  
e. Shiddapura Lake (Thubarahalli Lake) Rejuvenation Plan,  
f. Kundalahalli Lake Rejuvenation Plan,  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
12-11 
g. Nallurahalli Lake Rejuvenation Plan,  
h. Chinapanahalli lake Rejuvenation Plan,  
i. Hoodi Lake Rejuvenation Plan,  
j. Munekolala Lake (Achhana Lake) Rejuvenation Plan,  
k. Patandur Agrahara lake Rejuvenation Plan,  
l. Sheelavanthakere Lake Rejuvenation Plan,  
m. Yelkgata Lake Rejuvenation Plan,  
n. Four Unnamed Dried lakes Rejuvenation Plan  
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Surrounding Area development plan to be prepared to upgrade the drainage and 
sewage infrastructure to stop flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as 
dumping of SWM.  
6. Area Redevelopment:  
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plans for Existing Industrial Estates 
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plans for Garudacharpalya Vegetable Market 
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plans for Nallurhalli,  
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plans for Immadahalli,  
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plans for Channasandra,  
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plans for Kadugodi,  
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plans for Garudacharpalya,  
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plans for Sadarmangala,  
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plans for Kaveri Nagar  
7. Heritage Area Protection and Conservation Scheme:  
a) Heritage Master Plan for Whitefield Heritage Zone 
b) Grading of Heritage Buildings within PD 
c) Heritage Area Improvement and Development scheme  
8. Development of Physical Infrastructure/ Facilities: 
a) SWM Dry Waste Collection Centre:   10 Nos. 
b) SWM Organic Waste Collection Centre:  02 Nos 
c) SWM Aggregator:    01 Nos 
d) SWM Bio-Methanation Unit:   01 Nos 
9. Preparation of Disaster Mitigation Plan for EPIP & Industrial Estates 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
13-1 
13. PD 12: BELANDURU - HARALURU 
 
1. Planning District consists of the wards four BBMP wards, namely - Bellandu r (150), Marathalli 
(86), Konena Agrahara (113) and Hal Airport (87) and admeasures 3867.3 Ha. 
2. It houses several defence establishments – like HAL, NAL, ISRO, and number of IT/ ITES/ 
Aerospace Companies in number tech parks like Embassy Tech Village, RMZ Eco Space, 
Prestige Tech Park, Embassy Golf Link Bussiness Park, Divyashree Technopolis, Cessna 
Business Park and standalone large campuses – like that of Intel and Wipro as well as 
Independent Office Buildings where lakhs of people are employed. The residential 
developments are mostly of high density and unplanned in nature with the dense p ockets, 
plotted developments and high rise buildings. However, there are under s erved settlement 
pockets as well. Bellandur kere and series of lake define the drainage pattern of plann ing 
district; however the valley system has been disturbed due to urbanisation making  ORR tech 
zone highly vulnerable to flooding. At the same time, PD still has potential for futher growth 
to accommodate additional employment and population, which may further com pound the 
local level problems .  
3. Outer Ring Road, Intermediate Ring Road, Old Airport Road, and Sarjapura Road are some 
three major arterial roads passing through the PD, and highly haphazard local net work 
defines the connectivity network within the planning district. The Metro ORR (P hase 3- 
Hebbala to Silk Board) is scheduled to be implemented .  
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography 
Population (2011 Census): 1,97,982 
Area of PD: 3867.3ha 
Wards in PD: 5 
Gross Density (2011 Census): 52 pph 
Belanduru - Haraluru Planning District 
(PD No.12) is a major employment centre 
of Bengaluru city and located Central East 
- South East side in BMA. Bellandur Lake 
and its valley, HAL Airport, Defence 
Establishment, IT/ ITES & Business 
Offices/ Tech Parks along ORR , Malls and 
Commercial Places KGA Golf Course, high 
strained arterial road network and 
haphazard residential areas defines the 
characterics of Bellandur Planning 
District.  
Master Plan aims at targeted growth, 
promoting public transport, network 
improvements, and environmental 
protection.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
13-2 
4. PD- 12 has 1,97,982 inhabitants as per Census 2011, which is an increase by 87 .79% from 
Census 2001 (1,05,425). The workforce participation is 49% with 97,054 resident workers, 
whereas the total employment is three to four times the workers. There are 54,188 
households (2011), with average household size being 3.65, which is lowe r than BMA (4.01). 
The gross density is 51.2 pph, whereas the average residential density is 245 pph. The gross 
density is highest in Konena Agrahara ward (180 pph) and the least in Bellandur  ward (30 
PPH).  
Industry and Commerce 
5. Industrial and Commercial land uses together account for a considerable total area of 
planning district, this is due to the presence of large IT/ ITES Companies, Business/ o ffice 
complexes and commercial establishments, as mentioned earlier. The public establishments 
like HAL, NAL, Aerspace Division, ISRO, Helicopter Division,etc are also major emplo yment 
centres and  account for ~ 18% of total PD area. The Public sector is concentrated alo ng Old 
Airport Road while private establishment are concentrated on ORR and then Old Airport and 
Intermediate road.  
6. In addition, to major commercial establishment like malls and shopping comp lexes, several 
internals roads have retail establishments. More importantly, HAL vegetable market i s 
located in this PD.  
Existing Land Use 
7. Vacant land Use accounts for almost third of PD area, clearly indicating huge potential for 
future growth within the PD. Vacant use is followed by residential land use which accounts 
for 20.33% total PD. The defence and combine d industry and commerce use accounts for 
18% and 8.4% respectively. While lakes and streams constitute 10.38% of total PD area, p ark 
and open spaces have meager 2.34 %. Similarly, transportation and communication use also 
have lesser share at 4.88% of total PD area. 
8. Figure 13-1and Table 13-1presents the existing land use map 2015 and existing land use area 
statement for Planning District respectively.  
Housing and Slums 
9. Bellandur PD has seen a spate of development over last decade, and residential areas ha ve 
developed as per the requirements. Earlier it was defence that lead to public sector housing 
which is planned plotted layouts/ quarters like HAL and NAL, HAL 3rd stage, HAL GB Quarters, 
Sudam Nagar,and parallel developed were private layouts Vinayak Nagar, KR Garden, 
Murugeshpalaya, Jeevan Beema Nagar, Marathahalli, Anand Nagar, KPC Layout, Ambli pura. 
Then came the IT/ ITES lead development, which is now witnessing supply of high ri se 
apartment complexes and gated communities. At the same time, developed several 
unservice setttlements and slums. There are 22 slums in this PD out of which 2 slu ms are 
notified.  
Traffic and Transportation 
10. Traffic and Communication land uses account for mere 4.88% of total extent of P D. At 
present, Buses operated by BMTC and private companies (for their employees), cabs are the 
only modes that are available for public transport, though proposed Metro P hase 3 ORR 
(Hebbala to Silke Board) expected to improve public transport options further. There  is no 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
13-3 
BMTC Bus Station or Terminal / Depot in the planning district. Carmelaram Stati on is within 
the PD while Bellandur station is adjacent to PD is the potential commuter station. The lack of 
public transport options has increased the pressure existing road network, which also cater  
to heavy vehicle traffic leading to employment center and regional traffic (ORR caters to large 
amount of goods traffic) .  
11. The critical arteries are Outer Ring Road, Intermediate Ring Road, Old airport road and  
Sarjapura Road. These roads are followed by Wind Tunnel Road, Yemalur Road, Kemp apur 
Road, Bellandur Ker Bund Road, Harluru Road, Doddakannelli - Kadubeesanahalli Road, and 
Central Jail Road providing connectivity within and outside PD. The ro ad network within PD is 
haphazard and at certain location is disconnected.  
Figure 13-1: PD 12 Existing Land Use Map 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
13-4 
Table 13-1: PD 12 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 786.08 20.33 
Commercial 119.99 3.10 
Industrial 206.27 5.33 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 101.79 2.63 
Unclassified 682.80 17.66 
Public Utility 43.22 1.12 
Parks & Open Spaces 90.69 2.34 
Transport Communication 188.58 4.88 
Vacant 1246.56 32.23 
Agriculture 0.00 0.00 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 17.44 0.45 
Water Bodies 383.89 9.93 
Total 3867.30 100.00 
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
12. As per BWSSB, about 14.62% of households have metered water connections, whereas 8.5 % 
of households have sanitation connections. The under implementation water suppl y and 
sewage project is expected to improve the water supply network coverage a nd sewerage 
network coverage in this area. 
13. There are around 73 schools and number of higher educational institutes such as New 
Horizon College of Engineering, Pharmacy Collage, HAL Management Academy, M anipal 
University (Distance Education) etc.Further, 4 Government Health Centres & Hospitals and 12 
private hospitals, with a total of 974 beds are present in PD. Major Hospitals present in  PD 
include Manipal Hospital, Institute of Aerospace medicine, Sakra World Hospital. The HAL 
heritage and Aerospace museum is also situated in this planning district. There are 2 p olice 
stations in this PD. There is 1 fire station in this Planning district which is l ocated along the 
Sarjapur Road. There is no crematorium within the PD, and is served by Panathur Electric 
Crematorium.  
Lakes and Drainage 
14. Bellanduru Lake, Saul Kere, Kaikondrahalli kere, Kasavanahalli kere, and Haraluru Kere are  
present in this PD. All these lakes fall under Bellanduru catchment area. The valley system 
between Bellandur Kere and Varthur kere has been distrubed due to urbanisation.  
15. Murugeshpalya, Old Airport Road, Intermediate Ring Road, Sarjapur Road, Outer Ring Road  
(points where secondry and tertiary drains crosses ORR) are prone to flooding whereas 
Dental Collage Road, Marathahalli, and sevarl other areas are low-lying areas. The  
Park and Open Spaces 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
13-5 
16. KGA Golf Course is the biggest open space available in the PD and part o f Firing Range also 
falls within PD. Though there are several small parks/ open spaces in the layo uts/ planned 
residenial areas, no large park or playground is available for general public. 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: TARGETED GROWTH, TOD, PUBLIC TRANSPORT INTEGRATION, NETWORK 
DEVELOPMENT DENSIFICATION, REDEVELOPMENT, ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION, 
PROPOSALS 
1. PD is a major employment centre and still has potential to accommodate addi tion 
employment and residents, yet falls under two planning zones – Planning Zone A and B of 
RMP 2031. With the future expansion of economic activities within PD, it is ex pected to 
attract more traffic, while it is witnessing a haphazard and unplanned high density growth . 
The RMP2031 aims at targeted growth and facilitating planned development whil e 
integrating the existing developments through planned circulation network. At the  same 
time, areas within Planning Zone A are proposed to be stabilised. The RMP2031 also aims at 
environmental protection, redevelopment of existing dense/ unplanned areas and di saster 
management. Thus, the guiding principles for this planning district are as following: 
a. Target Growth through strategic allocation of Industrial and Commercial Use 
b. Stablisation of areas of PD within Outer Ring Road 
c. Further densification by utilizing vacant lands of areas of PD falling outside ORR 
d. Development of Public Transport Infrastructure to increase the share of public 
transport  
e. Promote Transit Oriented Development around Metro Stations   
f. Protection and Conservation of Lake System and Flood Protection 
g. Redevelopment/ upgradation of congested areas/ slums 
2. The Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use Distribution for the PD are depicted in 
Figure 13-1 and Table 13-1.  
Traffic and Transportation 
3. RMP2031 proposed city level public transport infrastructure like CRS, Metro and Mono Rail 
are running along roads within the Planning District. 
a. Commuter Rail Service (CRS): The RMP2031 proposes that CRS at regional level shall 
start/ terminate at the KR Puram Railway Station and integrated with city public 
transport network (Metro/ mono/ Bus). It is proposed that Carmelaram Station is 
developed for CRS.  
b. Metro ORR Link: It is proposed to develop metro link along Outer Ri ng Road and with 
4stations within this PD – namely a) Marathahalli (interchange with Mono Rail Link-
1), b) Kadubeesanahalli, c) Devarabeesanahalli and c) Bellandur and then leading to 
Ibballuru (interchange with Sarjapura Mono Rail Link) .  
4. Mono Rail/ BRTS/ LRT - Trinity to Varthur: The proposed Trinity to Varthur Mono Rai l along 
Old Airport/ Varthur Road passess through the Planning District and it is pro posed to develop 
stations at a) Manipal Hospital, b) Murugesh Palya, c) HAL Bus Station (interchang e with 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
13-6 
BMTC), d) HAL Museum, e) Jawahar Nagar (next to Marathahalli Market) and f) Marathalli 
(Interchange with Metro).  
5. Mono Rail / LRTS/ BRTS on  Sarjapura Road: It is proposed to develop a Mo no Rail link along 
the Sarjapura Road from Ibbalur Metro Station till Tchuddadenahalli on Sarjapura M ain Road 
near BMA boundary. The proposed Mono Rail link passes through this Special Devel opment 
Zone providing much needed connectivity with Metro ORR as well as Metro PRR. Th e first 
station within PD is an Interchange with Mono Rail along Inner Peripheral Ring Road and 
followed by stations along Sarjapura road at a) Wipro SEZ, b) Kodathi Gate, c) Gouthamagara, 
d) Interchange with Metro at PRR, e) Muthanallur Cross, f) Dommasandra Circle, and g) the 
terminal station at Tchuddadenahalli.  
6. Bus Transport: It is proposed that a Bus station needs to be developed in Bellandur Ward and 
located along proposed 45m wide road near railway line.  
Figure 13-2: PD 12 Proposed Land Use Map  
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
13-7 
Table 13-2: PD 12 Proposed Land Use Area Statement  
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 1461.31 37.79 
Commercial 75.68 1.96 
Industrial 269.76 6.98 
Public & Semi Public 117.50 3.04 
Unclassified 693.07 17.92 
Public Utility 40.65 1.05 
Parks / Open Spaces 175.08 4.53 
Transport & 
Communication 230.70 5.97 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 17.62 0.46 
Water Bodies 368.04 9.52 
NGT Buffer 417.89 10.81 
Total Developable Area 3867.30 100.00 
Agriculture 
 - 
Total PD Area 3867.30 - 
 
7. Intermodal Interchange Stations are proposed to be developed at Marathahalli  
8. Transit Oriented Development Zone is proposed to be applicable around all metro/ Mono Rail 
stations/ terminals/ interchanges located outside ORR i.e in Plannin g Zone B. I.e. The higer 
FAR would be applicable to properties on outer side of ORR and not for Inner side of PRR.  
9. To improve the accessibility to Public Transport Stations (Metro, Mono, BMTC  Bus Stations 
and CRS Railway Stations) and Educational Institutes, it is proposed to strengthen the existing 
road network by providing footpaths and cycle tracks (wherever feasible).  
10. The RMP2031 has identified new links roads and widening of certain road for network  
augmentation within the Planning district. 
a) Kariammana Agrahara Main Road: A 12 m wide road is proposed to be developed from 
Junction of Yemaluru Road and Bellandur Main Road to ORR (meeting at in tersection of 
New Horizon collage road) using existing Karaiammana Agrahara Main Road. This ro ad is 
expected to reduce the traffic on Marathahalli Brigde.  
b) Road Connecting ORR and Sarjapura Main Road via Saul Kere Bund Road :  An 18m wide 
road is proposed to be developed from ORR (next to RMZ Ecospace) to Sarjapura Road 
(meeting Sarjapura Road next to Petrol Bunk via Saul Kere Bund Road. It is exp ected that 
this road would reduce traffic on ORR.   
c) Widening of Certain Roads: The RMP2031 proposes upgration/ widening of certain ro ads 
to be taken up on priority: 
d) Development of Railway Crossings : It is proposed to upgrade/ widen a railway crossing at 
Carmelaram Railway Gate Crossing and SGR Dental Collage Road Railway crossing 
depending upon the feasibility of the development.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
13-8 
e) Preparation of Local Area Network Circulation Improvement Plan: The RMP2031 
proposes that a detailed local area circulation plan be prepared covering entire Bel landur 
Ward and parts of Marathalli Ward. Refer Figure 13-4 for tentative extent of ORR Zone 
for which local area circulation network improvement plan is to be prepared. The ex tent 
of ORR Zone can defined at the time of preparation of LANCIP. The objective of th e 
LANCIP is to identify and provide for missing links those are not identifi ed by RMP 2031, 
junction improvements, integration with proposed Metro Stations, traffic movement 
regulation, inter connect tech park network, provide for pedestrian and NMT facilities,  
providing traffic signals, footover bridges/ underpasses, removing all impedim ents (like 
utilities, etc).  
Figure 13-3: PD 12 Local Area Circulation Network Improvement Plan for ORR Zone   
 
 
11. The RMP2031 has identified critical junctions for geometric improvements for better and 
smoother traffic flow and to be taken up on priority.  
Protection of Lakes and Drainage 
12. All lakes fall under the larger catchment of Bellanduru – Varthuru Kere. The important 
Natural Drainage within PD is classified as following and is details are presented in PLU Map:  
a. Drainage connecting Bellanduru Kere and Varthur Kere= Primary 
b. Drainage connecting Ibbaluru Kere with Bellanduru Kere = Secondary 
c. Drainage connecting Saul Kere with Bellanduru Kere = Secondary 
d. Drainage leading upto Saul Kere and Secondary Drainage = Tertiary 
e. Tertiary drains/ streams within PD and applicable buffers are shown in PLU Map.  
13. The RMP2031 proposes that these streams  be kept free of all encumbrances, sludge, SWM, 
and no sewage be allowed to flow into the streams and lakes. It is also proposed that all l akes  

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
13-9 
be properly interconnected and rejuvenated. The RMP2031 also proposes rejuv enation of all 
lakes within the planning district.  
14. Provision of Open Spaces:  In order to provide the parks and open spaces for Planning 
District, the RMP2031 proposes development of two large parks within the Planning  District 
at following locations:  
a. In Bellanduru ward – valley system between natural drains as earmed in PLU Map 
and falling in Bellandur Amanikane revenue village .  
b. In Marathahalli ward near railway line and in Bellandur Amanikere revenue village as 
demarcated in PLU Map. 
c. Other Park and Open spaces as earmarked in PLU Map.  
15. Area Redevelopment:  
 Redevelopment of Marathahalli Market: The RMP2031 proposes that Redevelopment of 
Marathahalli Market and adjoin areas are taken up for redevelopment for provision of  
better infrastructure for Market Area and easing traffic movement on Old Airport Road.  
 Redevelopment of Dense Settlements/ Villages: The RMP2031 proposes that 
redevelopment/ upgration of dense settlements/ villages is undertaken to provi de 
necessary infrastructure and facilities. Dodda Kannelli, Bellandur, Yemaluru , 
Marathahalli , Sanjaya Nagar and Konena Agrahara are proposed to be taken up for 
redevelopment.  
16. Slum Redevelopment:  There are 20 slums (both notified and non-notified) within the PD and 
are devoid certain infrastructure and facilities. The RMP2031, in order to provide the exi sting 
slums with better infrastructure services, proposes in-situ redevelopment of the slums in a 
phased manner.. The Redevelopment can also be limited to upgradation of infrastructure and 
provisions of basic services.  
17. Street Vending Zone/ Road: The RMP2031 proposes that BBMP after following due process 
as prescribed in the Street Vending Act 2014 determines the areas/ streets for Infor mal 
activities/ Street Vending activitis where are allowed and not allowed.  
Disaster and Hazard Management 
18. PD being major employment centre within Bengaluru, lakhs of people wor k in the techparks/ 
business parks along O RR. The city economy is dependent on safe working conditions. It is 
therefore important to have emergency plan prepared and executed for swift reactions 
during emergency situation. The RMP2031 therefore proposes that a Disaster and H azard 
Mitigation Plan  be prepared It is also proposed to develop a fire station in Belland ur Ward.  
19. The RMP2031 proposes development additional 10 DWCCs, 1 OWCCs, and 1 Bio – 
Methanation Unit for solid waste management within the planning district.   
20. It is proposed to develop a crematorium in park and open space near Bellandur Kere.  
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for this planning district. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
13-10 
1. Road Development Plan 
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Category - 1 
Roads (as listed in Annexure) and other roads in phased manner.   
b. Important New Links 
o 45 m wide road connecting ORR to SH35 
o Kariammana Agrahara Main Road 
o Road Connecting ORR and Sarjapura Main Road via Saul Kere Bund Road  
c. Widening/ Upgradation of Certain Roads: 
o Belandur Lake Road  
o Panathur Road 
o Haraluru Road 
o Hosa Road 
o Dodda Kannelli – Kadu Beesanahalli Road 
o Yemaluru Road 
o SGR Dental Collage Road including widening of Railway Crossing  
o Railway Gate Sarjapura Crossing 
d. Junction Improvement Programme: 
o Sarjapura Road Junction (near Ibballur lake) 
o Bellandur Junction   
o Devarabeesanahalli  
o New Horizon Collage junction 
o Kada Bisanaha lli Junction  
o Intersection of ORR and Panathur Main Road 
o Intersection of ORR and SGR Dental Collage Road 
o Marathahalli Bridge Junction 
o Manipal Hospital Junction  
o ISRO Junction (Intersection of Old Airport Road and Wind Tunnel Road) 
o HAL Junction (Intersection of Old Airport Road and Suranjandas Road) 
o Yamalur Junction  
o Doddanekundi Cross (Intersection of Old Airport Road and Doddanekkundi Road) 
o Marathahalli Market Junction (near Ganesh Temple – intersection with 
Chowdeshwari Temple Street) 
o BEML Junction (Intersection of Suranjan Das Road and New Thippasandra Main 
Road) 
o Intersection of Suranjan Das Road and Jeevan Beema Nagar 10th Main Road) 
o Intersection of SGR Dental Collage Road and Munnekollal Main Road 
o Intersection of Yemalur Road and Kariammana Agrahara Road (including 
development of Culvert/ Road on drain. 
o Haralur Cross 
o Haralur Junction (intersection of Haralur Road and Dinne Anjaneya Swamy 
Temple Road) 
o Intersection of Haralur Road and Kudulu Road 
o Amruthanandamayi College Junction  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
13-11 
o Kaikodrahalli Junction  
o Intersection of Sarjapura Road and Wipro Road  
o Junnasandra Gate 
o Dodda Kannalli Junction  
o Carmelaram Junction  
o Intersection of Dodda Kannelli – Kadubeesanahalli Road and New Horizon Collage 
Road 
2. Development of Public Transport System:  
a. CRS Railway Stations 
i. Carmelaram 
b. Namma Metro 
i. Outer Ring Road 
c. Mono Rail/ LRT/BRTS: Trinity to Varthur 
d. Mono Rail/ LRT/BRTS: Ibbalur to Tchuddadenahalli 
e. Bus Stand in Bellandur Ward 
3. Development of Intermodal Interchange Stations  
a. Marathahalli and  
b. HAL Bus Station  
4. Development of Parks and Open Spaces 
a. In Bellanduru ward – valley system between natural drains as earmed in PLU Map 
and falling in Bellandur Amanikane revenue village .  
b. In Marathahalli ward near railway line and in Bellandur Amanikere revenue village as 
demarcated in PLU Map. 
c. Other Park and Open spaces as earmarked in PLU Map.  
5. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes and Streams:  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Preparation of Lakes & Streams Rejuvenation Plan : 
a. Master Plan Streams Rejuvenation Plan 
b. Bellandur Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
c. Saul Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
d. Kaikondrahalli Lake Rejuvenation Plan,  
e. Kasavanahalli Lake Rejuvenation Plan,  
f. Haraluru Lake Rejuvenation Plan,  
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Surrounding Area development plan to be prepared to upgrade the drainage and 
sewage infrastructure to stop flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as 
dumping of SWM.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
13-12 
6. Area Redevelopment:  
 Preparation of Local Area Network Circulation Improvement Plan for Bellandur Area 
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plans for Marathahalli Market Area 
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plans for Dodda Kannelli  
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plans for Bellandur,  
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plans for Yemaluru,  
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plans for Marathahalli,  
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plans for Sanjaya Nagar, Marathalli  
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plans for Konena Agrahara,  
7. Preparation of Slum Redevelopment Plans 
8. Declaration of Street Vending Zones/ Areas/ Streets 
9. Development of Physical Infrastructure/ Facilities: 
a) Fire Station:    01 Nos  
b) Crematorium:    01 Nos 
c) SWM Dry Waste Collection Centre:   08 Nos. 
d) SWM Organic Waste Collection Centre:  01 Nos 
e) SWM Aggregator:    01 Nos 
f) SWM Coconut Processing Unit:   01 Nos 
10. Preparation of Disaster Mitigation Plan   
a) Belandur ORR Employment & Tech Areas (from Marathahalli to Sarjapura Road) 
b) Drainage Improvement Plan 
c) Provision of Fire Station 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
14-1 
14. PD 13: PARAPPANA AGRAHARA – HULIMAVU 
 
1. The Parappana Agrahara – Hulimavur Planning 
District comprises of 5 wards, - Hongasandra (189), Managammanapalya (190), Si ngasandra 
(191), Begur (192) and Arakere (193) and falls within the Bommanahalli zone of BBM P. The 
total extent of PD is approximately 3356 ha.  
2. Parappana Agrahara – Hulimavur Planning District (PD No.12) is located South - South East in  
BBMP and shares its southern boundary with LPA of BMICAPA. It is spatially stretched fro m 
Central Jail (Hosur Road) till IIM (Bannerughatta Road), and houses several industries, 
garment factories, IT Companies commercial establishments, and higher order edu cational 
institutes like IIM. The presence of 21 Lakes, fully commercialized radial roads, highly strai ned 
arterial road network and combination of planned as well as haphazard residential  areas 
defines the characterics of PD. Major Landmarks within the PD are Meenakshi temple, 
Meenakshi Mall, Oxford College, Kudlu gate and Bangalore Central jail. 
3. Hosur Road, Bannerughatta Road, NICE Road, Begur Main Road, Central Jail Road/ Hosa 
Road, Begur – Hulimavu Road, Yelanahalli Road, Nyanappanahalli Road, Dodda Kammanahalli  
Main Road, Sir M Vishweshwaraya Road, etc are the existing roads defining the circulation 
pattern 
A. Existing Situation  
Demograhpy 
Population (2011 Census): 3,43,840 
Area of PD: 3356 ha 
Wards in PD: 5 
Gross Density (2011 Census): 103 pph 
Parappana Agrahara – Hulimavur Planning 
District (PD No.13) is located in the South 
East of BBMP. It spatially stretches from 
Central Jail (Hosur Road) till Bannerughatta 
Road, and houses several types of 
industries - garment factories, IT/ITES, 
Commercial establishments, and higher 
order educational institutes like IIM. The 
presence of 21 lakes, highly strained 
arterial road network and combination of 
planned as well as haphazard residential 
areas define the characterics of PD.  
 
The Master Plan aims at further 
densification of existing vacant lands, 
promoting public transport, network 
improvements, redevelopment and 
environmental protection.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
14-2 
4. As per Census 2011, PD 13 had a population of 3, 43,840, which has increased by 196% from 
the Census 2001 (1, 16,149). With total 1, 78,731 number of resident workers the workforce 
participation ratio stands at 52% of the population.  
5. There are 89,903 households in the PD, with average household size 3.8, whi ch is slightly 
lesser than the average household size in BMA (4.01). The Gross density is about 103 P PH 
whereas the gross residential density is already at 405 PPH .  
Industry and Commerce 
6. As mentioned, different types of industrial and commercial activities are located across the 
PD, which includes manufacturing, IT/ ITES, Ready Made Grament Factories, and commercial 
establishments. Spatially most of these are located along the Hosur road, Bannerughatta 
Road, and Begur Road and in Hongasandra, Singasandra, Begur, and Hulimavu. Garment 
Factories are located in Hongasandra (Arvind Mills is located at Kudlu gate), Mico 
Naganathpura Plant (Bosch) is singhasandra ward, IT/ ITES companies like BPL, Tata, 
Honeywell industry are located in Arekere Ward along Bennarughatta Road.  
7. The hosur road, Begur Road and Bennarughatta road are fully commercialized and hosts 
major commercial centres - the Royal Meenakshi Mall on Banerghatta Road and retail chain  
of Metro cash and carry on the Hosur road among others 
Existing Land Use 
8. Around 44% of total area is under vacant use, a clear indication that there is a h uge potential 
for further densification. The vacan lands are mostly located towards the LPA of BDA 
boundary with BMICAPA (southern side), adjoining the Hulimavu lake, Dodd a Begur lake and 
areas around Central Jail and Kudlu Lake. The residential use account for ~27%, whereas 
combined of industrial and commercial use account for ~8%. The public-semi pub lic use 
accounts for 5.2%. Figure 14-1 and Table 14-1 presents the Existing Land Use map 2015 and 
Existing Land Use area statement for PD.  
Figure 14-1: PD 13 Existing Land Use Map 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
14-3 
Table 14-1: PD 13 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 895.87 26.69 
Commercial 132.14 3.94 
Industrial 139.79 4.16 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 174.14 5.19 
Unclassified 0.03 0.00 
Public Utility 17.43 0.52 
Parks & Open Spaces 35.75 1.07 
Transport Communication 283.03 8.43 
Vacant 1481.14 44.13 
Agriculture 0.00 0.00 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 3.17 0.09 
Water Bodies 193.87 5.78 
Total 3356.36 100.00 
Housing and Slums 
9. The residential areas are of mostly of layout type with several high rise residential complexes. 
Some of the planned residential layouts include MICO layout, Pai Layout, Venkate shwara 
layout, AECS layout and Akshaynagar etc. It is noteworthy that the layout type develo pment 
in wards of Begur and Singasandra are getting amalagamated to develop group housing  
schemes and high rise apartment typology. 
10. There are 5 slums in this PD, and of which 2 slums are notified. Arekere Ward (ward no  193) 
with 2 slums has the highest number of slums. The population residing in  these slums is 4739 
(1.38% of the total PD population).   
Traffic and Transportation 
11. Hosur Road, Bannerughatta Road, NICE Road, Begur Main Road, Central Jail Road/ Hosa 
Road, Begur – Hulimavu Road, Yelanahalli Road, Nyanappanahalli Road, Dodda Kammanahall i 
Main Road, Sir M Vishweshwaraya Road, etc are the existing roads defining the circulation 
pattern. It mostly haphazard and road widths are not uniform.  
12. The main access arterial radial roads of BMA, the Hosur road at its east and Bannergh atta 
Road at its west and both connect to the NICE corridor. The Hosur road connects further to  
the Electronic city through the Electronic City Flyover, an important and major elev ated road 
link.  
13. It is noteworthy that Bannerghatta road and Hosur road connect the IT/BT and other 
industrial areas along the Bannerghatta road and the Electronic city through the NICE 
corridor. Most of roads within the PD are severly strained due to heavy traffic mo vement. 
Also, there are several intersections where congestion is regular phenomenon – which 
includes junctions like Arakere Gate junction, Meenakshi Mall Junction, Jail Road  Junction, 
Kudlu Gate junction, Begur Junction, etc.,  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
14-4 
14. Namma Metro is extending its services to these areas through two lines un der phase II, 
namely - Nagawara- Gottigere Red Line (2 stations) and Yellow Line RV road and 
Bommasandra line (6 stations). There is one Bus Station at Hosapalya is locat ed in this PD. It 
is expected that these would help reduce congestion on major radial roads.  
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
15. As per BWSSB, there are 13.3% of metered water supply connections and 8.5% of metered 
sewage and sanitation connections along the total households within the PD7, and there are 
2 GLSR. As per BBMP, there are 1 Bio-Methanation Unit (BMU), 10 Dry Waste Collecti on 
Centres (DWCC) and 1 Central Processing Unit located in this PD.8 As per KPTCL, there are 1  
220 Kv substations.  
16. As for Social infrastructure, there are 132 schools. Educational Institutions such as the 
Department of Horticulture, Coconut Development Board, Loyola PU College and other 
collagers are located in this PD. The famous Bangalore Central Jail is located in Parap pan 
Agaraha. There are 3 government healthcare centres, and 7 private nursing homes/ hospitals 
with total bed capacity of 318. Also, there is 1 Fire station within the Plannin g district located 
near the Hulimavu lake. 
Lakes and Drainage 
17. There are 21 lakes within the PD, and major ones being Hulimavu Kere, Dodda Begur Kere,  
Are kere, Hosa Kere, Chikka Begur Kere, Kudlu Dodda Kere, Garvebhavipalya Kere, Parapana 
Agrahara kere, Singasandra kere. All these lakes are within the Kormangala – Challaghatta 
Watershed and drains into Bellandur Kere.  
18. There are several areas which are low lying and flood prone with in the PD, which includes  
Arekere, Kalen Agrahara, Hulimavu, areas along drains from Begur and Chikka Begur lake and 
leading to Madivala Kere, Hongasandra, Kudlu Gate, sections of Hosur Road and 
Bannerughatta Road, etc.  
Heritage and Culture 
19. There are 29 heritage buildings/ sites within the planning district, including the 8  th century 
(890 AD) Pancha Linga Nageshwara Temple complex, which was established by the Ganga  
dynasty period and locates the (1100 years old) stone inscription having  reference to a 
͚BeŶgaluƌu Waƌ͛ that is the eaƌliest ƌefeƌeŶĐe to BeŶgaluƌu as a settleŵeŶt. The teŵple 
complex is a State Protected monument. The temple houses 5 Lingaas (the symbol of Lord 
Shiva) – Nagareshwara, Parvathi Nageshwara, Choleshwara, Karneshwara, 
Kaalikamateshwara and hence the name Pancha Lingeshwara temple.  
20. The Begur fort is a circular fort with a small temple within the fort walls. There are reference s 
stating Begur was initially a Jain settlement with centre of Sanskrit and Vedic studies.  
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: PUBLIC TRANSPORT INTEGRATION, CIRCULATION NETWORK 
DEVELOPMENT, DENSIFICATION, ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION AND REDEVELOPMENT,  
                                                           
7 BWSSB, 2014 
8 BBMP, 2015 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
14-5 
PROPOSALS 
PD offers varied employment opportunities when compared to electronic city or whitefield,  
ranging from household to manufacturing to service sector and is highgly com pact. Yet has huge 
potential to accommodate addition employment and residents. With the future expan sion of 
economic activities within PD, it is expected to attract more traffic, while it is witnessin g a 
haphazard and unplanned high density growth. The RMP2031 aims at targeted gr owth and 
facilitating development of public transport while integrating the existing d evelopments through 
planned circulation network. This is for the fact the existing developments provides very  limited 
scope for improvement of circulation network. Thus the thrust is more on public transpor t. The 
RMP2031 also aims at environmental protection of 21 lakes and drainage sys tems, 
redevelopment of existing dense/ unplanned areas and disaster management. Thus, the guiding 
principles for this planning district are as following: 
a. Development of Public Transport Infrastructure to increase the share of public 
transport  
b. Improvement of Circulation Network 
c. Further densification by utilizing vacant lands 
d. Growth through strategic allocation of Industrial and Commercial Use 
e. Protection and Conservation of Lake System and Flood Protection 
f. Redevelopment/ upgradation of congested areas/ slums 
2. The Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use Distribution for the PD are depicted in 
Figure 14-2 and Table 14-2 respectively.  
Figure 14-2: PD 13 Proposed Land Use Map 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
14-6 
Table 14-2: PD 13 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total 
Developable Area (%) 
Residential 1913.85 57.02 
Commercial 51.56 1.54 
Industrial 103.51 3.08 
Public & Semi Public 145.50 4.34 
Unclassified 0.03 0.00 
Public Utility 13.40 0.40 
Parks / Open Spaces 87.21 2.60 
Transport & Communication 417.45 12.44 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 3.00 0.09 
Water Bodies 188.24 5.61 
NGT Buffer 432.60 12.89 
Total Developable Area 3356.36 100.00 
Agriculture 
 - 
Total PD Area 3356.36 - 
Traffic and Transportation 
3. RMP2031 proposed city level public transport infrastructure like CRS, Metro and Mo no 
Rail/LRT/BRTS  are running along roads within the Planning District. 
a. Metro Electronic City Link : As per BMRCL, the Metro Phase 2 (R V Road Interchange to 
Bommasandra) along Hosur Road is under construction. It is observed that this PD is 
likely to have 5 stations. The RMP2031 proposes that the line be extended further till 
Chandapura.  
b. Metro Gottigere – Nagawara – International Aiport Link (Red Line): Metro Phase II 
Gottigere Nagawara is passing through the PD. The network designed for Metro Phase II 
includes 2 stations within planning district, namely – Gottigere, and Hulimavu. In 
addition, depending on the feasibility, it is proposed to extend the Metro  Link till 
Basavanapuara which futher south of Gottigere.  
c. Metro PRR Link: The RMP2031, with a long term view, has proposed to develop metro 
link along proposed PRR alignment and NICE corridor in future depending upon feasiblity. 
Though the NICE corridor is outside PD, it is expected to provide connectiv ity to PD, and 
therefore it is proposed that stations along NICE corrdridor be developed  at the 
intersection of the cross roads.  
d. Mono Rai/ LRT/ BRTS: The proposed LRTS/ BRTS around Inner Peripheral Ring Road 
passes through the PD. The alignment within the PD - coming from Choodasandra Roa d 
and runs along the proposed Inner PRR alignment. It is proposed to develop stati ons at 9 
different locations including ones near Chikka Begur Metro Station (interchange), Begur 
Kere, Askhayanagara, Arekere, Hulimavu, and Coconut Development Board depending on 
feasibility.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
14-7 
e. Bus Transport: It is proposed to identify suitable locations for Bus stations at a) Gottiger e 
b) along Begur Koppa Road c) Arali Mara and d) Hulimavu Metro Station.  
4. Transit Oriented Development Zone is proposed to be applicable around all metro  rail 
stations/ terminals/ interchanges located in the Planning District. 
5. To improve the accessibility to Public Transport Stations (Metro, Mono, BMTC  Bus Stations 
and CRS Railway Stations) and Educational Institutes, it is proposed to strengthen the existing 
road network by providing footpaths and cycle tracks (wherever feasible).  
6. The RMP2031 proposes that all existing road crossovers (bridge/ Vehicular Under Pass) on 
NICE road  be widended to four lanes irrespective of existing road widths.  
7. The road network within the PD is highly haphazard and nature of improv emments would 
include widening of certain roads and more importantly junction design imp rovement. 
Therefore the RMP2031 has identified 34 junctions for geometric improvements for better 
and smoother traffic flow that are to be taken up for development .  
Protection of Lakes and Drainage 
8. All lakes fall under the larger catchment of Bellanduru – Varthuru Kere. The important 
Natural Drainage within PD is classified as following and details are presented in PLU Map:  
a. Drainage connecting Hulimavu Kere and Madivala Kere= Secondary 
b. Drainage connecting Begur Kere with Agara Kere = Secondary 
c. Drainage leading to Hulimavu Kere and Begur Kere = Tertiary  
d. Drainage leading upto and downstream of Parappan Agrahara Kere = Tertiary 
e. Tertiary drains/ streams within PD and applicable buffers are shown in PLU Map.  
9. The RMP2031 proposes that these streams have to be kept free of all encumbrances, sludge, 
SWM, and no sewage be allowed to flow into the streams and lakes. It is therefore proposed 
that all lakes  be properly interconnected and rejuvenated.  
10. The RMP2031 proposes the lake protection and rejuvenation of all lakes within thi s PD  and 
its natural streams by preparing lake and surrounding area development plan. 
11. Area Redevelopment:  
a. Redevelopment of Market Areas/ Streets: The RMP2031 proposes that 
redevelopment plan all existing daily market areas (like those in Kudlu, Begur, 
Hulimavu) be prepared so as to provide better facilities for vendors, i mprove 
pedestrian facilities, shifting of utilities (if required), provide/ manage parking and  
easy of traffic movements.  
b. The RMP2031 proposes that redevelopment/ upgration of dense settlements/ 
villages is undertaken to provide necessary infrastructure and facilities. Hongasandra, 
Begur and Chikka Begur are proposed to be taken up for redevelopment.  
12. Slum Redevelopment:  There are 5 slums (both notified and non-notified) within the PD and 
are devoid of certain infrastructure and facilities. The RMP2031, in order to provide th e 
existing slums with better infrastructure services, proposes redevelopment of the slums.  
13. Street Vending Zone/ Road: The RMP2031 proposes that BBMP after following due process 
as prescribed in the Street Vending Act 2014 determines the areas/ streets for Infor mal 
activities/ Street Vending activitis where are allowed and not allowed.  
14. Disaster and Hazard Management 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
14-8 
The RMP2031 proposes that a comprehensive Disaster and Hazard Mitigation Plan  be 
prepared for Hongasandra, Mangammanapalya, Hosur Road, and Bennarughatta Road 
towards traffic emergencies, urban flooding and fire.  
15. Heritage and Culture: 
RMP2031 has identified Begur Temple Heritage Zone for preservation and protection of 
Begur Fort and Pancha Linga Nageshwara Temple. Figure 14-3 presents the Bangalore Palace 
Heritage Zone  
Figure 14-3: PD 13: Proposed Begur Temple Heritage Zone 
 
 
16. The RMP2031 proposes development additional 10 DWCCs, and 2 OWCCs, for solid waste 
management and one crematorium in Begur ward within the planning district.  
 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD 11: Dodda Nekkundi - Whitefield   
1. Road Development Plan 
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Category - 1 
Roads (as listed in Annexure) and other roads in phased manner.   
b. Upgradation of Existing Roads 
o Kariammana Agrahara Main Road 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
14-9 
o Road Connecting ORR and Sarjapura Main Road via Saul Kere Bund Road  
c. Widening/ Upgradation of Certain Roads: 
o Begur Road 
o Begur Koppa Road 
o Hosa Road 
o Kudlu Road 
o Harapanahalli – Begur Road 
o Nyanappanahalli Road 
o Hulimavu Main Road  
d. Junction Improvement Programme: 
o Swamy Vivekanand Junction 
o Arekere Gate Junction 
o BPL Junction  
o Intersection of Bannerughatta Road and BDA 80ft Road 
o Hulimavu Gate Junction  
o Meenakshi Mall Junction  
o Meenakshi Temple Junction  
o Intersection of Bannerughatta Road and Dodda Kammanahalli Road 
o Loyala School Junction  
o BBMP Office Gottigere Junction  
o Intersection of Bannerughatta Road and Shankar Nag Road 
o Hulimavu Tarrfic Police Station Junction  
o Gottigere Junction  
o Doddakammnahalli Junction 
o Intersection of Yelanhalli Road and Begur Koppa Road 
o Hulimavu Junction  
o Intersection of Hulimavu Road and Balmuri Main Road  
o Intersection of Hulimavu Road and Sir M Vishweshwariah Road  
o Intersection of Begur - Hulimavu Road and Sir M Vishweshwariah Road  
o Intersection of Begur - Hulimavu Road and Nyannapanahalli Road  
o Intersection of Begur - Hulimavu Road and Yelanahalli Road  
o Intersection of Begur Road and Harapanahalli Main Road 
o Kudlu Junction (intersection of Kudlu Road and Haralur Road  
o Nayanappanahalli Cross 
o Intersection of Begur Cross Road and Nyannapanahalli Road  
o Beguru Junction 
o Intersection of Sir M Vishweshwariah Road and 5th Main Road (near KPTCL Sub-
station) 
o Intersection of Chikka Begur Road and Manipal County Road 
o Intersection of Hosur Road and Basapura Village Road 
o Channakeshvanagar Junction (on Central Jail Road) 
o MICO Factory Junction 
o Kudlu Panchayath Office Junction  
o Rayasandra Circle 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
14-10 
o AECS Dental College Junction  
2. Development of Public Transport System:  
a. Namma Metro 
i. Metro Electronic City Link between R V Road Interchange and Bommasandra 
(Yellow Line) 
ii. Metro Gottigere – Nagawara – International Aiport Link (Red Line) 
iii. Metro PRR  
b. Mono Rail/ LRT/BRTS: Inner Peripheral Ring Road  
c. Bus Stations/ Stand:  
i. Gottigere   
ii. Along Begur Koppa Road  
iii. Arali Mara and  
iv. Hulimavu Metro Station 
3. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes and Streams:  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Preparation of Lakes & Streams Rejuvenation Plan : 
i. RMP2031 Streams Rejuvenation Plan 
ii. Hulimavu Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
iii. Begur Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
iv. Chikka Begur Rejuvenation Plan,  
v. Are Kere Lake Rejuvenation Plan,  
vi. Yelenahalli Kere Lake Rejuvenation Plan 
vii. Hosa Kere Lake Rejuvenation Plan 
viii. Parappan Agrahara Kere Lake Rejuvenation Plan 
ix. Akshayanagara Kere Lake Rejuvenation Plan 
x. Kalena Agrahara Kere Lake Rejuvenation Plan 
xi. Garvebhavipalya (Hongasandra) Kere Lake Rejuvenation Plan 
xii. Revenue Lake in Hongasandra Lake Rejuvenation Plan 
xiii. Singasandra Kere Lake Rejuvenation Plan 
xiv. AECS Layout Singasandra Kere Lake Rejuvenation Plan 
xv. Yelakunte Kere (ITI Layout) Lake Rejuvenation Plan 
xvi. Soma Sundara Palya Kere Lake Rejuvenation Plan 
xvii. Koodlu Kere Lake Rejuvenation Plan 
xviii. Basapura Kere Lake Rejuvenation Plan 
xix. Basapura Kere (2 nd Lake) Lake Rejuvenation Plan 
xx. Beratena Agrahara Kere Lake Rejuvenation Plan 
xxi. Lake Rejuvenation Plan for Two Lakes in Chandrashekharpura Revenue 
Village (in Begur Ward)  
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Surrounding Area development plan to be prepared to upgrade the drainage and 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
14-11 
sewage infrastructure to stop flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as 
dumping of SWM.  
4. Area Redevelopment:  
 Preparation of Local Area Network Circulation Improvement Plan for Chikka Begur and 
Begur ward.  
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plans for Kudlu Market Area 
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plans for Begur Market Area 
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plans for dense areas of Chikka Begur 
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plans for dense areas of Begur Ward 
5. Preparation of Slum Redevelopment Plans:  
6. Declaration of Street Vending Zones/ Areas/ Streets 
7. Development of Physical Infrastructure/ Facilities: 
a) Crematorium:    01 Nos (in Begur Ward) 
b) SWM Dry Waste Collection Centre:   10 Nos. 
c) SWM Organic Waste Collection Centre:  02 Nos 
8. Preparation of Disaster Mitigation Plan  
9. Heritage Area Protection and Conservation Scheme:  
a) Heritage Master Plan for Begur Temple Heritage Zone 
b) Grading of Heritage Buildings within PD 
c) Heritage Area Improvement and Development scheme  
 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
15-1 
15. PD 14: BANASHANKARI – BTM - MADIVALA 
 
1. The Banashankari – BTM – Madivala PD comprises of 16 wards, - comprises of 16 BBMP 
wards – namely Karisandra (166), Pattabhiram Nagar (168), Jayanagar East (170),  
Gurappanapalya (171), Madiwala (172), BTM Layout (176), J.P.Nagar (177), Sarakki (178) , 
Shakambari Nagar(179),  Banashankari Temple Ward (180),  Kumaraswamy Layout (181) 
falling within the South Zone of the BBMP and Bommanahalli (175), Yelachenahalli (185), 
Jaraganahalli (186), Puttenahalli (187), Bilekahalli (188) falling within the Bom manahalli zone 
of BBMP and admeasures 2721 ha (27.21 sqkm). It stretches from Hosur Road to Kanakapu ra 
Road (east and west), and Jayanagar 7th Block (on North) and IIM (on southern side).  
2. The plannned large residential BDA schemes like Jayanagar, BTM Layout, JP Nagar, 
Kumarsawamy Layout, Banashankari, highly dense areas of Bommanahalli, Illiyas Nagar, 
Kadarenahalli, higher eduction insitutes like - Indian Institute of Management (IIM), Jayad eva 
Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences and Research, Dayanand Sagar College, Power Tranining 
Institute, the availabllity of quality healthcare and social facilities like – playgrounds, parks, 
auditoriums, etc, rapid commercialisation of planned residential areas, private i ndustrial 
estates, and IT/ ITES as well as Garment Industires, the 7th century old Banshankari temple 
and two important lakes – Madivala and Sarakee Kere define the characteristics of this 
vibrant PD.  
3. Hosur Road, Bannerughatta Main Road, Kanakapura Road, Outer Ring Road, Marenahalli 
Road, Jayanagar 4th Main Road, Devarachekkanahalli Main Road, Begur Main Road, 29th 
Main Road BTM, Puttenahalli Main Road/ Kothur Village Main Road, Vyasar aya Ballal Rd, 
Tavarakere Main road, and other internal road of planned layouts and Metro Phase 1 (Green 
Line) define the circulation pattern for the PD.  
Population (2011 Census): 6,36,202 
Area of PD: 2721 ha 
Wards in PD: 16 
Gross Density: 234PPH 
Planning District Banashankari – BTM – 
Madivala is located at south central 
quadrant in BBMP. It is characterised 
with residential areas of Jayanagar, 
J.P.nagar, Banashankari I Stage, BTM 
Layout Stage I, Kumarswamy layout etc. 
yet which is undergoing constant 
commercialisation along the main access 
roads. This is resulting in change of urban 
form, in residential character and 
additionally increasing traffic congestion 
 
The RMP2031 proposes to guide the 
development by stabilising the 
commercial activities in planned manner, 
yet retaining the residential nature of the 
neighbourhoods. It also proposes 
improved connectivity and better access 
to public transport.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
15-2 
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography 
4. As per Census 2011, PD 14 has a population of 6,36,202, with a decadal growth rate (2001-
2011) of 37%. The work force participation rate is 44.28%. There are 1,60,556 households in 
this PD, with average household size 3.96 which is very similar to the average hou sehold size 
in BMA (4.01).  
Industry and Commerce 
5. There are several individual and scattered factories and industries at Jayanagar, J. P. N agar, 
Madivala and BTM layout. Also, industrial land use is located at Bikasipura NS Palya, 
Vasanthapura and Bommanahalli at the south west of the PD. Further, there is Industrial mix 
(high tech industry) along the Bannerghatta road, with offices of HSBC, Infosys BP O and at JP 
nagar 4th Phase, along the 3rd main road  which locates the office –IT complex of Kalyani 
Magnum and offices of Oracle and other IT offices such as VMware and Practo. Some 
industrial units are located in the Bommanahalli ward as well. There are two pritave 
industrial areas namely – Jayachamarajendra Industrial Estate and Pratibha Industrial Estate 
located along Kanakapura Road.  
6. The retail commercial activities are primraly located along Marenahalli road, 7th  main, 16th 
main of the BTM layout Stage I & II, along the Outer Ring Road in J.P.Nagar, 24th main 
J.P.Nagar 5th Phase. Shopping malls such as Gopalan Mall, Central and Shoppers Stop  are 
located along the Bannerghatta road. It is important to note that the commercial acti vities 
are rapidly proliferating into residential areas of Jayanagar, J.P. Nagar, and BTM Layout.  
7. Governments offices under public and semi land use are the Geological Survey of In dia (GSI), 
BSNL that are located in this PD. 
Housing and Slums 
8. As mentioned earlier, BDA promoted residential layouts define the low rise but high  density 
residential character. This includes ISRO layout, Kumaraswamy layout, BSK II stage, BTM 
Layout I stage, BTM Layout II stage, Vijay bank layout, Arakere MICO layout, etc . In addition 
to BDA layouts there are several government quarters such as BSNL, LIC, GSI quarters are 
located in PD. Other residential areas present are Ilyas Nagar, Maruti Nagar etc.   
9. There are 32 slums spread across 13 wards with about 7.5% of the PD population reside in 
these slums. Of total slums only 9 slums are notified. Banashankari Temple Ward has 
maximum number of slums (9 no.s ) .  
Land Use  
10. The predominant land use is residential land use covering ~45.67% of the  total land area in 
this PD. Commercial land use is ~8.53%, industrial land use makes up ~2.98% and public- semi 
public land use is ~6.18%. The area under transportation is ~14.55% of the land use. The 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
15-3 
parks and open spaces in this PD is ~3.12% and ~1.5 % of the land use in thi s PD is also under 
forest.  
11. Figure 15-1 and Table 15-1 presents the existing land use map 2015 and existing land use 
area statement respectively.  
Figure 15-1: PD 14 Existing Land Use Map  
 
Table 15-1: PD 14 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 1242.63 45.67 
Commercial 231.98 8.53 
Industrial 81.18 2.98 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 169.62 6.23 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 19.03 0.70 
Parks & Open Spaces 86.49 3.18 
Transport Communication 396.05 14.55 
Vacant 327.81 12.05 
Agriculture 0.00 0.00 
Forest 41.63 1.53 
Streams 8.93 0.33 
Water Bodies 115.78 4.25 
Total 2721.12 100.00 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
15-4 
Traffic and Transportation 
12. The circulation network being based on a grid network system is better than most o f areas in 
Bengaluru. With the presence of North – South Namma Metro Corridors (operation and 
being extended), 2 BMTC Bus Stations/ TTMCs (located at Banashankari and Jayanagar 4th 
block) and 2 BMTC bus depots (at Banashankari and Kevempu Nagar), has provided the much 
needed public transport option to the residents. A truck terminal is present at Yelach anahalli 
along the Kanakpura road. 
13. Metro services are available and accessible, the existing Phase – I coverage including 5 metro 
stations (Green Line) with interchange at the RV Road metro station and the proposed m etro 
Phase II network also passing through this PD with 4 proposed stations (Yellow Line) with 
proposed interchanges at Jayadeva metro station and Silk Board metro station an d 3 
proposed metro stations (Red Line). 
14. The major arterial roads and sub-arterial roads in this PD are Banashankari and Kanakpura 
Road, Bannerghatta road, KR Road ,ORR (100 ft wide), Marenahalli Road, R V road and 9th 
Cross Jayanagar road, Gubalala Road (Pipeline road), Subramanyapura main road. Se veral 
critical junctions like Silk Board junction, Jayadeva hospital junction and Jedimara junction on 
Bannerghatta Road, Banshankari TTMC junction, Udupi Garden junction, junctions along 
Marenhalli road, Sarakki junction in Kumarswamy layout, Bommanahalli junction  can be 
located in this PD. 
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
15.  As per BWSSB, about 44.2% of households are having metered water connecti ons whereas 
only 26.67% of households have sewage connections. Also there are 4 number of  GSLR, 1 STP 
(Maidwala STP), 1 Intermediate Sewage Pumping Stations, and 5 Pumping stati ons and 
borewells located in this PD. As per BBMP, there are 1 Bio Methanation Unit and 9 Dry  Waste 
Collection Centres in this PD. As per KPTCL, there are 6 number of 66kV substations located in 
this PD. 
16. This PD has several city level health and educational infrastructure. There are around 250 
schools, and several colleges in this PD. The major educational institutions l ocated here are 
IIM, Dayanand Sagar group of Institutions, National College, R. V. Dental College alo ng with 
other schools. There are 59 number of private and government hospitals including the 
renowned hospital, Jayadeva Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences and Research having total 
bed capacity of 3675. There is on Crematorium in Banashankari.  
Park and Open Spaces 
17. The forest areas located in this PD are the Doresanipalya Reserved forest at Arekere, mini 
forest in JP Nagar 3rd Phase. Parks and open spaces are located as neighbourhood parks,  
parks along the RV road and lake front parks of Madiwala Lake. About 3% of the land area in  
this PD is under parks and open space use. 
Lakes and Drainage 
18. The major lakes in this PD are the Madiwala Lake, Sarakki lake, Puttenhalli lake and 
Yelachnahalli lake. Yelachenahalli Kere is connected to Sarakee Kere and Sarakee Ke re to 
Madivala kere. Madivala Kere is connected to Agara Kere and then to Bellandu r Kere. The 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
15-5 
drains from Madivala Kere to Bellandur Kere are classified as Primary. The natural drains 
connecting to Madivala Kere from Sarakee Kere and Hulimavu Kere have been design ated as 
secondary, whereas drains connecting to secondary drains and sarakee kere have been 
classified as Tertiar Drainage.  
19. There are several low lying areas in this PD which are flood prone areas or water logging  
areas according to the Strom Water Drainage Master Plan by BBMP. They are north and 
south east to Madiwala lake i.e. Kuvempu nagar and Kodichekkenahalli, east of Sarakki lake 
at J.P. Nagar 6th Stage and Yelachanhalli.  
Heritage and Culture 
20. This PD comprises of many cultural places of temples and masjids such as the Banshankari 
Temple, Kumargiri Ganesh temple, Ragiguda temple, Bilal masjid on Bannerghatta road,  
Jamia Masjid at Madiwala amongst others. The heritage monument of the Banashankari 
Temple witnesses much of cultural events and festivals that see much pilgrim footfalls. 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: STABILISATING THE GROWTH WITHIN ORR, TRANSIT 
INTEGRATION, REDEVELOPMENT, DISASTER & HAZARD MITIGATION AND ENVIRONMENT 
PROTECTION. 
PROPOSALS 
1. Vibrant PD is rapidly getting transformed wherein more and more economic/ co mmercial 
acitivities are coming up in well planned areas for availability wider roads and other social 
infrastructure, yet this PD falls under two planning zones – Planning Zone A and B of RMP 
2031. With the future expansion of economic activities within PD, it is ex pected to attract 
more traffic, while it is change in population density. The existing and prop osed metro 
network is likely to make this PD a major transportation centre. The RMP2031 therefo re aims 
at stabilistion in areas within Planning Zone A (within Outer Ring Road and target growth in 
Planning Zone B. The RMP2031 also aims at environmental protection, redevel opment of 
existing dense/ unplanned areas and disaster management. Thus, the guiding principles fo r 
this planning district are as following: 
a. Target Growth through strategic allocation of Industrial and Commercial Use 
b. Stablisation of areas of PD within Outer Ring Road 
c. Development of Public Transport Infrastructure to increase the share of public 
transport  
d. Promote Transit Oriented Development around Metro Stations   
e. Protection and Conservation of Lake System and Flood Protection 
f. Redevelopment/ upgradation of congested areas/ slums 
2. The Proposed Land Use Map and the proposed land use area statement are presented in 
Figure 15-2 and Table 15-2.  
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
15-6 
Figure 15-2: PD 14 Proposed Land Map 
 
 
Table 15-2: PD 14 Proposed Land Use Area Statement  
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 1471.31 54.07 
Commercial 126.25 4.64 
Industrial 24.50 0.90 
Public & Semi Public 173.51 6.38 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 10.98 0.40 
Parks / Open Spaces 73.95 2.72 
Transport & Communication 438.77 16.12 
Forest 41.21 1.51 
Streams 8.75 0.32 
Water Bodies 115.20 4.23 
NGT Buffer 236.68 8.70 
Total Developable Area 2721.12 99.93 
Agriculture 
 - 
Total PD Area 2721.12 - 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
15-7 
3. In addition existing Metro Phase 1 (Green Line), BMRCL has also plann ed Phase 2 Yellow Line 
(RV Road to Bommasandra) which starts at RV Road (interchange) and Red Line (Gottigere – 
Nagavara) with Interchange at Silk Board. The RMP2031 has also proposed to develop a  
Metro link along Outer Ring Road. All these planned metro links are passing throu gh the PD, 
thereby providing mutlitpule options for public transport. The RMP2031 therefo re proposes 
that multimodal interchange be developed at RV Road and Silk Board wherein B MTC and IPT 
are also seamlessly integrated with Metro.  
4. To improve the accessibility to Public Transport Stations (Metro, and BM TC Bus Stations) and 
Educational Institutes, the RMP2031 proposes strengthening of the existing road network by 
providing footpaths and cycle tracks (wherever feasible). It is proposed that area accessibility 
plans are prepared .  
5. The RMP2031 proposes that Outer Ring Road Section from Silk Board to Nayandanahal li be 
planned for Signal Free Movement is designed as Signal Free Corridors with focus on 
Pedestrian Safety and development of NMT facilities. This is proposed to be d one in 
consideration of proposed Metro along Outer Ring Road.  
6. The Hosur Road stretch between Silk Board and Oxford Collage witness heavy traffic 
congestion, the RMP 2031 therefore along with the Junction Improvements proposes that a 
detailed traffic movement/ circulation plan be prepared for ease of traffic movement and 
also providing emergency services during emergency situation. This may also in clude 
provding additional Ramps to existing Electronic city flyover, underpasses, parki ng restricts, 
etc.  
7. The RMP2031 has identified around 23 road junctions that are to be taken up f or geometric 
improvements for better and smoother traffic flow. Some of the important junctions include  
8. RMP2031 proposes that a detailed parking plan be prepared by BBMP in for Commercial  
Areas/ Roads of Jayanagar 4th Block, Jayanagar 5th Block, Jayanagar 9th Block, JP Nagar 2nd 
Phase, JP Nagar 6th Phase, Outer Ring Road, Kanakapura Road, Bannerughatta Road, Hosur  
Road and Gubalala Road.  
9. Area Redevelopment : 
a. Redevelopment of Market Areas/ Streets: The RMP2031 proposes that redevelopment 
plan for all existing daily market areas (like those in Sarakee Market, Bans ahankari 
Market, Bommanahalli,JP Nagar, etc) be prepared so as to provide better facilities for 
vendors, improve pedestrian facilities, shifting of utilities (if required), provide/  manage 
parking and easy of traffic movements.  
b. Redevelopmment of Private Indsutrial Areas: The RMP2031 proposes redevelopment of 
existing Industrial areas like JC Industrial Area, Prathibha Industrial Estate for upgration of 
infrastructure. These areas can also be taken up for complete redevelopment as per the 
provisions of Zoning Regulations.  
c. Area Redevelopment: The RMP2031 proposes that redevelopment/ upgration of dense  
settlements like  Hunase Mara Banashankari, Illiyas Nagar, Bommanahalli, etc are taken 
up for redevelopment so as to provide all infrastructure facilities and services .  
10. Slum Redevelopment: There are 32 slums (both notified and non-notified) within the PD and 
are devoid of certain infrastructure and facilities. The RMP2031, in order to provide th e 
existing slums with better infrastructure services, proposes redevelopment of these slums 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
15-8 
11. Street Vending Zone/ Road: The RMP2031 proposes that BBMP after following due process a s 
prescribed in the Street Vending Act 2014 determines the areas/ streets for Informa l 
activities/ Street Vending activitis where are allowed and not allowed.  
12. All lakes fall under the larger catchment of Bellanduru – Varthuru Kere. The drains from 
Madivala Kere to Bellandur Kere are classified as Primary. The natural drains connecting t o 
Madivala Kere from Sarakee Kere and Hulimavu Kere have been designated as secondary, 
whereas drains connecting to secondary drains and sarakee kere have been classified as 
Tertiar Drainage.  
17. The RMP2031 proposes that these streams  be kept free of all encumbrances, sludge, SWM, 
and no sewage be allowed to flow into the streams and lakes. It is therefore proposed that all 
lakes  be properly interconnected and rejuvenated.  
18. The RMP2031 proposes the lake protection and rejuvenation of Madivala Lake, Sarakee Kere , 
Puttenahalli Kere and Yelachanahalli Kere, and its natural streams by preparing l ake and 
surrounding area development plan. 
13. To provide comfort to pedestrians and improve street aesthetics, the RMP20 31 propos es 
road side and avenue plantation for all RMP2031 designated arterial roads, sub -arterial and 
important roads. 
14. To cater to future management and operations of Solid Waste in future, it is proposed that in 
addition to existing facilities, 17 Dry Waste Collection Centres, 4 Organic Waste Collection 
Centres and 1 Aggregator are proposed to be developed within the Planning D istrict by 
BBMP. Further, the RMP2031 proposes for a development of additional 220kV Substation to 
cater to the future power demand. 
15.  To augument social facilities, it is proposed to development 1 additional cremati on ground 
near Madivala Kere in Bilekahalli Ward .  
16. Disaster & Hazard Mitigation Plan for J P Nagar/ Madivala:  This PD has low lying and flood 
prone areas which are, north and south east to Madiwala lake i.e. Kuvempu nagar and 
Kodichekkenahalli, east of Sarakki lake at J.P. Nagar 6th Stage and Yelachanhalli h as seen 
water logging. This poses risk to urban flooding and emergency situations, po sing risk to 
human safety and economic losses. It therefore proposed that Disaster & Hazard Mitigation 
Plan (DHMP) for these areas that needs to be prepared.  
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD 14 Banashankari – BTM - Madivala: 
1. Road Development Plan 
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Catego ry -1 
Roads (as listed in Annexure) and other roads in phased manner.   
b. Signal Free Corridor Silk Board to Nayanadanhalli 
c. Traffic Ciruculation Plan for Silk Board to Oxford Collage 
d. Junction Improvement Programme: 
i. Silk Board Junction 
ii. Bommanahalli Junctio (Swamy Vivekananda Circle) 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
15-9 
iii. Sagar Hospital Junction  
iv. Jayadeva Circle 
v. BTM Circle 
vi. Madivala Check Post Junction 
vii. Jedimara Signal 
viii. Illiyas Nagar Junction on ORR (near JP Nagar metro Station) 
ix. Sarakki Market Junction  
x. IIM/ HSBC Junction  
xi. Arekere Junction  
xii. Udupi Garden Junction 
xiii. Banashanakari Bus Station Junction  
xiv. Kadirenahalli Cross (ORR) 
xv. Intersection of RV Road and Marenahalli Main Road 
xvi. Jayanagar 5 th Block Bus Stand Junction  
xvii. Ragigudda Junction (Intersection of Marenahalli Road and 28 th Main Road). 
xviii. Intersection of ORR and BTM 29 th Main Road 
xix. Intersection of Hosur Road and Hosapalya Main Road 
xx. Intersection of Bannerughatta Road and Devarachikkanahalli Road 
xxi. Bilekahalli Junction (Next to Bus Stop) 
xxii. Guruappanapalya Junction 
e. Accessibility Improvement Plans 
i. Metro Stations (existing and future) 
ii. Higher Order educational Institutes 
2. Development of Public Transport System 
a. Namma Metro 
i. Metro Electronic City Link between R V Road Interchange and Bommasandra 
(Yellow Line) 
ii. Metro Gottigere – Nagawara – International Aiport Link 
iii. Metro ORR Link 
3. Preparation of Parking Plans for Commercial Areas/ Public Buildings / Places 
a. Jayanagar 4th Block, 
b. Jayanagar 5th Block,  
c. Jayanagar 9th Block,  
d. JP Nagar 2nd Phase,  
e. JP Nagar 6th Phase,  
f. Outer Ring Road,  
g. Kanakapura Road,  
h. Bannerughatta Road,  
i. Hosur Road  
j. Gubalala Road  
k. Marenahalli Road 
l. BTM 16th main road and 7th main road 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
15-10 
4. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes and Streams 
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification  of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Preparation of Lakes & Streams Rejuvenation Plan  
i. RMP2031 Streams Rejuvenation Plan 
ii. Madivala Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
iii. Sarakki Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
iv. Puttenahalli kere Rejuvenation Plan, and 
v. Yelachanahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Surrounding Area development plan to be prepared to upgrade the drainage and 
sewage infrastructure to stop flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as 
dumping of SWM.  
5. Area Redevelopment 
 Preparation of Local Area Network Circulation Improvement Plan for Bommanahalli  
Ward .  
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plans for Sarakki Market Area 
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plans for Banashankari Market Area 
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plans for JP Nagar Market Area 
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plans for Illiyas Nagar 
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plans for Hounse Mara Banasahnakri 
6. Preparation of Slum Redevelopment Plans 
7. Declaration of Street Vending Zones/ Areas/ Streets 
8. Development of Physical Infrastructure/ Facilities: 
a) Crematorium:    01 Nos (in BilekhaliWard) 
b) SWM Dry Waste Collection Centre:   29 Nos 
c) SWM Organic Waste Collection Centre:  06 Nos 
d) SWM Aggregrators:    01 Nos 
e) 220Kv Sub-station:    01 Nos (Eshwarinagar next to 
Department of Space) 
9. Preparation of Disaster and Hazard Mitigation Plans 
a) Major Arterial Roads (Outer Ring Road, Kanakapura Road, Hosur Road and Bannerughatta 
Road) 
b) Flood Protection for identified areas 
10. Heritage Area Protection and Conservation Scheme:  
a) Grading of Heritage Buildings within PD 
b) Heritage Area Improvement and Development scheme   
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
16-1 
16. PD 15: KATHRIGUPPE 
Population (2011 Census): 4,21,179 
Area of PD: 1324.46 Ha 
Wards in PD: 9 
Gross Density (2011 Census): 320 pph 
Kathriguppe Planning District (PD No15) 
is located in the Central South West in 
BBMP and shares its western boundary 
with LPA of BMICAPA. It is characterised 
by dense residential areas as well 
commercialised road network. The PD 
currently is in transition from being 
predominantly a residential to a mixed 
use zone with commercialization seen 
along all major roads.  
RMP2031 aims at stabilising the 
transformation by limiting commercial 
activities to on certain roads and 
planned redevelopment of certain areas .  
1. The Kathriguppe planning district comprises of 9 wards and a part of Vasanthpura ward (ward 
is partly under jurisdiction of LPA of BMICAPA). The 9 wards of BBMP includ e Hosakerehalli 
(161), Chikkalasandra (183), Padmanabha Nagar (182), Katriguppe (163), Vidyapeetha (164 ), 
Giri Nagar (162), Sri Nagar (156), Ganeshmandira Ward (165), Hanumantha Nagar (15 5). PD 
admeasures around 1324 ha.  
2. The plannned yet low rise high density residential BDA schemes like Kumarsawamy Layo ut, 
Banashankari, highly dense areas of Banashakari, Dattaterya Nagar, Gavipuram, 
commercialized streets, educational institues like BNM PU Collage, PES Collage of Pharmachy, 
Poornaprajna Vidyapeetha, Kempegowda Medical Collage, small neighbourhood parks , 
Kempabudhi Kere, define the character of PD.  
3. Outer Ring Road, Ittamadu Main Road, Kathriguppe Main Road, 80ft Road, 50ft R oad, 
Uttarahalli Main Road/ Puttalingaih Road, Subramanyapura Main Road, are the maj or roads 
within PD.   
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography  
4. As per Census 2011, PD 15 has a population of 421179, which has increased by 44.34 % from 
the year 2001 (291797). The workforce participation rate is ~ 43% of the po pulation. The 
Gross density is 318 pph and the residential density is 586.7pph. 
5. There are 95427 households in this PD, with average household size 4.4, which is h igher than 
the average household size in BMA (4.01).  

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
16-2 
Industry and Commerce 
6. The PD is characterized with commercial land use along the roads and few industrial pl ots 
towards the southern part of the PD in Padmanabha Nagar and Chikkalasandra. The 
predominant commercial areas are along Outer Ring Road, Katriguppe (mainly near 
Katriguppe Juncion), 80 feet road, and 50 feet road, and Banashankari BDA complex. 
Land Use  
7. The predominant land use is residential landuse with 54.73 % of the land area followe d by 
the area under transportation which is 16.48 %. The total area under commercial land use  is 
7.58 %.  The area under public- semi public is 4.51 %. Figure 16-1 and Table 16-1 presents the 
existing land use map and existing land use area statement for PD 15.  
Figure 16-1: PD 15 Existing Land Use Map  
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
16-3 
Table 16-1: PD 15 Existing Land Use Area Statement  
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 724.84 54.73 
Commercial 100.43 7.58 
Industrial 6.72 0.51 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 59.68 4.51 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 4.58 0.35 
Parks & Open Spaces 44.04 3.32 
Transport Communication 218.26 16.48 
Vacant 144.30 10.89 
Agriculture 0.00 0.00 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 9.17 0.69 
Water Bodies 12.44 0.94 
Total 1324.46 100.00 
Housing and Slums 
8. Residential land use is characterised by dense low rise residential buildings and apartments,  
dotted with a few apartments. Some of the residential areas that are present in the PD are: 
Banashankari 1st and 3rd stage and part of Banashankari 2nd stage, Katriguppe, 
Padbanabhnagar, Girinagar, Hanumanthnagar. There are about 95,000  
9. There are 18 slums in this planning district out of which 6 are notified  slums. Wards with 
most number of slums are Hosakerahalli and Deepanjali Nagar. There is a risk of fire hazard in 
the highly dense wards and slums. 
Traffic and Transportation 
10. The Outer Ring Road (ORR) passes across the PD and some of the important junctions i n the 
PD are Katriguppe Junction, Devegowda Signal (Kitur Rani Chanamma Circle), and Vid yapetha 
Junction.  
11. Sri Vidyanagar Bus Stop (in Hoskerahalli) and Kamakhya Bus Depot are two of the transpo rt 
infrastructure present in the PD. There are no metro lines passing through the PD; the 
nearest metro (phase 1) stations are Banashankari Metro Station , JP Nagar metro station  on 
the north – south line and the Mysore Road Metro Station on East – West line.  
Park and Open Spaces 
12. The Open spaces and parks account for more than 3 % of the landuse but are not distributed 
equally in the area. There are several small neighbourhood parks in this planning district. 
Lakes and Natural Features 
13. The Vrushabhavati River passess through west of PD and some drains within the PD drain i n 
Vrushabhavati River.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
16-4 
14. Lakes in this planning district include Kempambudhi Kere, Gowdana Playa Kere. According to 
the SWD master plan, there are very few low lying points which are located in the far north 
and south of the PD. 
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
15. As per BWSSB, about 50% and 26.9% of households have water connetion and sanitation 
connections respectively. Also there are 12 no of DWCCs and 1 no of OWCC withi n PD for 
SWM.  
16. There are 114 schools and 24 health centres and hospitals in this PD. Kempegowda Institute  
of Medical Sciences, PES Degree College, Institute of business management and technolog y 
and Shirdi Sai College are some of the higher educational facilities present in this PD. This PD 
also has other social facilities like government library, swimming pool, playgrounds, 
crematorium, etc. There is one fire station in Banashankari BDA Complex  
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS:  STABILISATION, PUBLIC TRANSIT INTEGRATION, 
REDEVELOPMENT AND ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION 
PROPOSALS 
1. The PD extent falls under two planning zones, Planning Zone A and Planni ng Zone B, however 
since the PD is already fully developed, and highly commercialized, the RMP2031 prop oses to 
regulate the commercial developments in both the zones through designated commercial 
use. Further, RMP2031 aims at providing public transport and its integration with local 
network. At the same time, redevelopment and environment protection is also proposed. 
TOD  be applicable to all development around metro stations but within Planning Zo ne B.  
2. The Proposed Land use Map and Proposed land use area statement is given i n Figure 16- 2 
and Table 16-2.  
3. RMP2031 proposed city level public transport infrastructure like Metro and Mon o Rail are 
running along roads within the Planning District. They Include the following: 
a. Metro ORR: It is proposed to develop Metro all along Outer Ring Road and the 
stretch within the PD . 
b. Mono Rail/ LRT/ BRTS – Intermediate Ring Road: Mono Rail/ LRT/ BRTS  is proposed 
to be developed at city level passes through the PD and runs along 50ft 
(Kumaraswamy temple) road and Hosakerehalli to meet Mysuru road then leading to  
KSRTC Satellite Bus Stand on Mysuru Road.  
4. The RMP2031 proposes multi modal interchange at Kamakhya BMTC Depot  and Sri  Vidhya 
Nagar Bus Station  
5. Transit Oriented Development Zone is proposed to be applicable around all metro  rail 
stations/ terminals/ interchanges located in the Planning District. 
6. To improve the accessibility to Public Transport Stations (Metro, Mono, BMTC  Bus Stations 
and CRS Railway Stations) and Educational Institutes, it is proposed to strengthen the existing 
road network by providing footpaths and cycle tracks (wherever feasible).  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
16-5 
Figure 16-2: PD 15 Proposed Land Use Map 
 
Table 16-2: PD 15 Proposed Land Use Area Stetement  
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 796.96 60.17 
Commercial 44.36 3.35 
Industrial 0.00 0.00 
Public & Semi Public 52.78 3.98 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 5.42 0.41 
Parks / Open Spaces 29.96 2.26 
Transport & Communication 237.12 17.90 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 8.51 0.64 
Water Bodies 12.41 0.94 
NGT Buffer 136.95 10.34 
Total Developable Area 1324.46 100.00 
Agriculture 0 - 
Total PD Area 1324.46 - 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
16-6 
7. The RMP2031 has identified around 13 road junctions that are to be taken up f or geometric 
improvements for better and smoother traffic flow.  
8. RMP2031 proposes that a detailed parking plan be prepared  for Commercial Areas o f  
Kathriguppe, Outer Ring Road, Kathriguppe Main Road, 80ft Road, 50ft Road, 
Subramanyapura Main road and Ittamadu Main Road .  
9. To provide comfort to pedestrians and improve street aesthetics, the RMP2031 prop oses 
road side and avenue plantation for arterial roads, sub-arterial and important roads.   
10. As mentioned earlier, entire PD drains into Vrushabhavati River. The natural drainage within 
the PD have been classified as following: 
a. Drainage downstream of Kamakhay Bus Depot (ORR) leading to Vrushabhavati River 
via Ittamadu Kere and Hosakerehalli = Secondary  
b. Drainage downstream of Kempabudhi Kere leading to Vrushabhavati River = 
Secondary  
c. Other drainage/ streams leading to secondary streams (as marked in PLU) = Tertiary 
11. The RMP2031 proposes that these streams  be kept free of all encumbrances, sludge, SWM, 
and no sewage will be allowed to flow into the streams and lakes. It is therefore proposed 
that all lakes be be properly interconnected and rejuvenated.  
12. The RMP2031 proposes the lake protection and rejuvenation of Kempabudhi  Kere, Ittamadu 
Kere, and Hosakere and its natural streams by preparing lake and surrounding  area 
development plan. 
13. There are 18 slums (both notified and non-notified) within the PD and are devoid of certain 
infrastructure and facilities. The RMP2031, in order to provide the existing slums with b etter 
infrastructure services, proposes redevelopment of the slums  
14. The RMP2031 proposes that BBMP after following due process as prescribed in the Str eet 
Vending Act 2014 determines the areas/ streets for Informal activities/ Street Vending 
activitis where are allowed and not allowed.  
15. The RMP2031 proposes a comprehensive Disaster and Hazard Mitigation Plan  be p repared 
for Outer Ring Road, Srinivaspura, and areas around secondary streams towards traffic 
emergencies, urban flooding and fire emergencies  
16. To cater to future management and operations of Solid Waste in future, it is proposed that in 
addition to existing facilities, 16 Dry Waste Collection Centres, and 1 Organic Waste 
Collection Centres, are proposed to be developed within the Planning District by BBMP.  
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every  
planning district. Following are the projects for PD15: Kathriguppe. 
1. Road Development Plan 
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Category - 1 
Roads and other categories in phased manner.  
b. Upgradation of Master Plan Roads 
i. Outer Ring Road 
ii. Hosakerahalli Main Road  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
16-7 
iii. 80 feet Main road (Banashnakari 3rd Stage) 
iv. Kathriguppe Main Road 
v. Ittamadu Main Road  
vi. 50ft Main Road  
vii. Uttarahalli Main Road/ Puttalingaih Road,  
viii. Subramanyapura Main Road 
ix. Kerekoti Main Road 
c. Junction Improvement Programme 
i. Devegowda Circle  
ii. Hosakerehalli Junction 
iii. Ittamadu Traffic Signal  
iv. Kathriguppe Circle 
v. Kamakhya Talkies Junction  
vi. Kittur Rani Chinnamma Circle 
vii. Kadirenahalli Junction 
viii. Vidhyapeeth Circle 
ix. KEB Colony Circle  
x. Maruthi Circle 
xi. Intersection of Kumaraswamy Temple Road and 14th Main Road (BSK –I) 
xii. Intersection of Kumaraswamy Temple Road and 17th Main Road 
(Munneshwara Block) 
xiii. Muneshwara Nagar Kerekodi Junction  
2. Development of Public Transport System 
d. Namma Metro 
i. Metro ORR 
e. Mono Rail  
i. Mono Rail Link – Intermediate Ring Road 
3. Development of Intermodal Station on Metro ORR 
f. Srividhya Nagar Bus Station (Metro + BMTC) 
g. Kamakhya Bus Depot Station (Metro + BMTC 
4. Accessibility Improvement Plans: 
a. For Planned Station (Metro & Mono Rail) 
b. For Educational Institutes 
5. Preparation of Parking Plans for Commercial Areas/ Public Buildings / Place s: 
a. ORR  
b. Kathriguppe Main road 
c. 80ft road. 
d. 50ft Road 
e. Ittamadu Main Road 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
16-8 
6. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes and Streams:  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification  of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Preparation of Lakes & Streams Rejuvenation Plan : 
a. RMP2031 Streams Rejuvenation Plan 
b. Kempabudhi Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
c. Gowdana Playa Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Surrounding Area development plan to be prepared to upgrade the drainage and 
sewage infrastructure to stop flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as 
dumping of SWM.  
7. Area Redevelopment: Following areas/ slums are proposed to be taken up under Area 
Redevelopment: 
a. Swagath Nagar  
b. Chamundi Nagar  
c. 100 feet road Ambedkar nagar  
d. Maruti Nagar  
8. Preparation of Slum Redevelopment Plans:  
9. Declaration of Street Vending Zones/ Areas/ Streets 
10. Development of Physical Infrastructure/ Facilities: 
a) SWM Dry Waste Collection Centre:   16 Nos. 
b) SWM Organic Waste Collection Centre:  01 Nos 
c) 220kv Sub-station:    01 Nos 
11. Preparation of Disaster and Harzard Mitigation Plan  
a) Outer Ring Road 
b) Srinivas Nagar 
c) Areas along Secondary Strea ms 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
17-1 
17. PD 16: GOTTIGERE – ANJANAPURA  
Population (2011 Census): 2,72,629 
Area of PD: 4022 ha 
Wards in PD: 6 
Gross Density: 68PPH 
The Planning District 16 is located at 
southern quadrant of the BMA planning 
area. It is characterised with residential 
areas of Gottigere, Uttrahalli, J.P.nagar 
7th phase, Anjanapura Layout, 
Banashankari 6th stage etc. It is 
characterised by the Turahalli Reserved 
Forest.  
The RMP2031 proposes densification of 
the residential areas in a planned 
manner along with increased public 
transport share and other transit 
integration and infrastructure 
upgradation 
1. The Gottigere – Anjanapura PD extent measures 4022 ha (40.22 sq,km.) and comprises of 6 
wards,- namely Uttarahalli (184), Gottigere (part with BMICAPA) (194), Konanakunte (1 95), 
Anjanapura (part BMICAPA) (196), Vasanthapura (197), Hemmigepura (part BMICAPA) (198) 
and covers the Bommanahalli Zone and Rajarajeshwari Zone of BBMP. Additionally o nly a 
small part of the ward Rajarajeshwari (160) falls under this PD. 
2. The J.P. Nagara Layout, 7th and 8th phase and Uttarahalli are low rise - medium dense that is 
currently undergoing fast transformation with upcoming high rises. The other layou ts of 
Anjanapura Layout, Banshankari Layout 6th Stage at the southern part of the PD are well 
planned are low rise and low dense, that the RMP2031 proposes densification to cater to  the 
future population.  
3. Nice Expressway and NICE ring road can be accessed from the west and south of the PD,  
while the Kankapura road, Ittamadu main road, Subramanyapura-Vasanthapura main road 
and Uttarahalli main road, Amruthanagar main road, Gottigere-Kengeri road are the m ajor 
roads within the PD. 
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography 
4. As per Census 2011, PD 16 has a population of 2,72,629, with a decadal growt h of 141.75 % 
(2001-2011). The work force participation rate is 43.33 % of the population. The Gr oss 
density is 67.7 pph and the residential density is 348.3pph. 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
17-2 
5. There are 82,998 households in this PD, with average household size 3.28  which is 
substantially lesser than the average household size in BMA (4.01).  
Industry and Commerce 
6. There are few industrial units along the Kanakpura road in sectors of automation, breweries 
and distilleries, garment manufacturing. Industrial units are located such as glass factory , 
textile mills and agro-based industry located Amruthnagar main road, Subramn ayapura road 
has textile mill and north of Turahalli forest respectively. 
7. Commercial activities are intermittent in this PD such as the retail of Metro Cash and  Carry 
located at ISRO layout. Further some commercial establishments are along the Kanakpura 
road. Small retail commercial and informal markets are located along the Kothnur road. 
Land Use  
8. The predominant land use is under vacant land use with ~46.76% of the PD land area. 
Residential landuse comprises ~19 % of the total land area in this PD. It is not eworthy that 
though the PD is under the BBMP jurisdiction, approximately 46.51% of the l and is still vacant 
and correspondingly land under agricultural land use is ~7.16 %. 2.52 % of t he landuse is 
under industrial land use and ~2.38 % of the land is under commercial land use. 
Figure 17-1 and Table 17-1 presents the existing land use and existing l and use area 
statement for PD 16. 
Figure 17-1: PD 16 Existing Land Use Map  
 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
17-3 
Table 17-1: PD 16 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 782.62 19.45 
Commercial 99.56 2.47 
Industrial 101.31 2.52 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 2.66 0.07 
Public Semi Public 84.71 2.11 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 26.31 0.65 
Parks & Open Spaces 74.90 1.86 
Transport and Communication 368.05 9.15 
Vacant 2157.66 53.63 
Agriculture 0.00 0.00 
Forest 244.23 6.07 
Streams 10.06 0.25 
Water Bodies 70.86 1.76 
Total 4022.93 100.00 
Housing and Slums 
9. Residential land use (54.73%) has the character of low rise with layouts such as ISRO layout 
(part), Arekere Mico Layout (part), Banashankari 6th Stage (1st block, 4th block, 5th  block, 
6th block), Anjanapura BDA layout (LB Shastry Nagar, Narayan nagar), J.P.Nagar 7th, 8th and 
9th Phase. Much of the residential typology is the layout type. The PD is seeing em ergence of 
high rises for residential with high rises at different stages of construction. 
10. The Average Gross density is 67.76 pph and the residential density is 358.34 pph. 
11. There are 9 slums located in 4 wards out of which 1 notified. The ward with mo st number of 
slums is Vasanthapura (ward no. 197) with 3 slums locate within it. The population residing in 
the slums is 20,242 (7.4% of total PD population) 
Traffic and Transportation 
12. The Transport infrastructure in this PD includes 2 BMTC Depots; Depot 33 located at Poorn a 
Pragyan Layout and Depot No. 34 located at Kothnur Dinne.  
13. As proposed by the BMRCL, metro alignment of Phase II has coverage within this P D which is 
extension of the Green Line on the Mysore road. The 5 metro stations in  this alignment are 
Anjanapura cross road metro station, Krishna Leela Park metro station, Vajrahalli metr o 
station, Thalghattapura metro station, Anjanapura metro station. 
14. 762 km is the approximate road length in this PD. It is bounded by the arteria l roads of NICE 
Expressway just outside its west side, NICE road to its south and by Bannerghatta road to i ts 
east, cutting through the PD at its south east. The other arterial road of Kanakpura road run s 
along its centre almost diagonally, which meets the NICE corridor just outside the P D at its 
south side.  Other arterial roads are Ittamadu main road, Subramanyapura-Vasanthapura 
main road and Uttarahalli main road. Subarterial roads in the PD are Amruthnagar m ain road, 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
17-4 
80 ft road along Banshankari 6th Stage, Kothnur road that runs along the east of the PD. 
Additionally the subarterial road of Gottigere – Kengeri road runs between the Kothnur road 
and the Amruthnagar road at the southside of the PD. The Collector roads in the P D are 
Vajrahalli road that cuts through Turahalli Reserved Forest, BWSSB service road that runs  
diagonally along centre of the PD. 
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
15.  As per BWSSB the percentage of households having metered water connections is 16.61% 
and the percentage of households have sewage connections is 11.85%, 3 number of GSLR  
and 1 Pumping station and borewell located in this PD. The BWSSB pipeli ne runs diagonally 
(south west to north east) at the centre of the PD along the Gubalala road that is from 
beyond NICE corridor, and across through ISRO layout.  As per BBMP, there are 1 Central 
Processing Unit and 4 Dry Waste Collection Centres in this PD. As per KPTCL, th ere are 2 220 
kV substation,  6 66kV substations located in this PD. 
16. Social infrastructure in this PD is: 183 schools and several colleges in this PD, and  the major 
educational institutions located here are DPS School; and colleges such as KSIT Engineerin g 
College, City engineering college etc. There are 15 number of private and govern ment 
hospitals, and 1 Fire Station located in this PD. 
Park and Open Spaces 
17. This PD has Turahalli Reserved forest admeasuring 4.46 sq.km. located at the west of the PD. 
The presence of the reserved forest of Turahalli ensures large green lung space in  this PD.  
Several layouts have the neighbourhood level parks, BBMP parks or CA sites. 
Lakes and Drainage 
18. The lakes in this PD are Konankunte lake, Dodda kalasandra kere Chunchaghatta la ke, 
Kothnur lake, Subbarayana kere, Anjanapura lake, Kembathanahalli kere on the eastern half 
of PD and Dorai kere lake, Subramanyapura kere, Gubabalalu kere and Thalaghattapura k ere 
in the western part of the PD. 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: DENSIFICATION OF RESIDENTIAL AREAS IN A PLANNED MANNER, 
IMPROVED TRANSPORT CONNECTIVITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSIT INTEGRATION AND 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION. 
PROPOSALS 
1. The RMP2031 proposes densification of the residential areas in a planned manner alon g with 
increased public transport share and other transit integration and infrastructure upgradation. 
2. The Proposed Land Use Map and proposed land use area statement analysis is presented in  
Figure 17- 2 and Table 17-2 respectively .  
3. The RMP2031 proposes city level public transport infrastructure such as Metro/MRT and 
LRT/Mono Rail/ BRT along roads within the Planning District. They are the following:  
a. Metro/MRT: Phase II Metro services proposed by BMRCL along the Kanakapura Road 
and Bannerghatta Road . The Phase II stations of Green Line are a) Anjanapura cross 
road metro station, b) Krishna Leela Park metro station, c) Vajrahalli metro station, d) 
Thalghattapura metro station, e) Anjanapura metro station. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
17-5 
b. LRT/Mono Rail/ BRT: proposed at city level along the Inner PRR road. It is proposed to 
extend Bannerghatta metro line till Basavanapura. 
4. The RMP2031 also proposes 1 BMTC Bus Terminus/ TTMC on the Inner PRR in Nara yan 
Nagar, Doodakalisandra Village. 
5. The RMP2031 proposes 1 intermodal interchange at junction of Kanakpura Ro ad and Inne r 
PRR at Raghuvanahalli village. 
6. Transit Oriented Development Zone is proposed to be applicable around all Metr o rail / 
LRT/Mono Rail stations/terminals located in the Planning District. 
7. In order to improve the accessibility to Public Transport Stations (Metro, LRT/Mono Rail/ 
BMTC Bus Stations) it is proposed to strengthen the road network by providing footpath s and 
cycle tracks.  
8. RMP2031 proposes that a detailed parking plan be prepared for Kanakpura Road, Inner PR R 
area. 
 
 
Figure 17-2: PD 16 Proposed Land Map 
 
 
 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
17-6 
 Table 17-2: PD 16 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 2450.71 60.92 
Commercial 50.44 1.25 
Industrial 46.05 1.14 
Public & Semi Public 73.87 1.84 
Unclassified 
 0.00 
Public Utility 33.74 0.84 
Parks / Open Spaces 140.98 3.50 
Transport & Communication 499.84 12.42 
Forest 235.54 5.85 
Streams 9.82 0.24 
Water Bodies 71.57 1.78 
NGT Buffer 410.37 10.20 
Total Developable Area 4022.93 100.00 
Agriculture 
 - 
Total PD Area 4022.93 - 
 
9. Further, to improve overall connectivity within and with other areas outside planning d istrict 
following improvements are proposed for network connectivity enhancement: 
a. Inner Peripheral Ring Road:  It is proposed to develop the 30m RoW Inner Perip heral 
Ring Road that is concentric and runs between the two rings of Outer Ring Road and 
Peripheral Ring Road.  
b. Overall Geometric Improvement of Certain Roads: RMP2031 proposes overall  
geometric improvement of certain roads which includes uniform right of way and 
cross –section, provision of Pedestrian and wherever possible NMT facilities. Also 
include improvement of junction on these roads.  
10. The RMP2031 hasidentified 8 road junctions that are to be taken up for geometri c 
improvements for better and smoother traffic flow. 
11. To provide comfort to pedestrians abd improve street aesthetics, the RMP20 31 proposes 
road side and avenue plantation for arterial roads, sub-arterial and important roads. 
12. The RMP2031 recognizes the present status of slums and potential for in-situ (to  the extent 
possible) Redevelopment of Slums and proposes that slum redevelopment be taken up in in 
phased manner.  
13. RMP2031 proposes that BBMP, in accordance to the provisions of Street Vend ing Act, 2015, 
determine the areas for informal activities/ street vending. 
14. As mentioned earlier, entire PD drains into Vrushabhavati River. The natural drainage within 
the PD have been classified as following:  
a. Drainage downstream from Aalahalli Lake meeting Chudahalli Reservoir in BMICAPA  
area – Tertiary  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
17-7 
15. The RMP2031 proposes that these streams be kept free of all encumbrances, sludge, SWM, 
and no sewage be allowed to flow into the streams and lakes. It is therefore proposed that all 
lakes  be properly interconnected and rejuvenated. 
16. The RMP2031 proposes the lake protection and rejuvenation of all lakes and  its natural 
streams by preparing lake and surrounding area development plan.  
17. To cater to future management and operations of Solid Waste, it is proposed that in add ition 
to existing facilities, 10 Dry Waste Collection Centres, 1 Bio-Methanation Unit, 1 Organic 
Waste Collection Centres, 1 Aggregator and 1 coconut Waste Processing Plant and 1  
Integrated Waste Processing Plants  are proposed to be developed within the Planning  
District by BBMP.  
18. The RMP2031 proposes for an additional of 220kV Substation to cater to the fu ture power 
demand and 1 Fire Station. 
19. It is proposed to have 2 additional hospitals, 4 burial and cremation ground.  
20. The RMP2031 proposes 1 Regional Park / Large Scale City Park and 1 Sports Com plex within 
this PD. 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
RMP2031 hasbroken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD 16 Gottigere – Anjanapura: 
1. Road Development Plan:   
a. RMP2031 Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Category - 1 
Roads. 
b. Upgradation of Master Plan Roads 
i. Kankapura road, 
ii.  Uttarahalli main road,  
iii. Amruthanagar main road,  
iv. Ittamadu main road,  
v. Subramanyapura-Vasanthapura main road  
vi. Gottigere-Kengeri road 
c. Junction Improvement Programme 
i. Gottigere junction at Bannerghatta road. 
ii. Raghuvanahalli Bus stop; Intersection at Kanakpura road and Inner PRR. 
iii. Intersection at Kanakpura road and Vajrahalli road. 
iv. Konanakunte Cross bus stop junction 
v. Intersection at Gubbalalu road and Vasanthapura road. 
vi. Intersection at Subramanyapura road and Vasanthapura road 
vii. Uttarahalli bus stop junction 
viii. Arehalli bus stop junction 
2. Development of Public Transport System:   
a. Namma Metro  
i. Metro Phase II: Extension along Kanakpura road and Bannerghatta Road  
b. LRT/Mono Rail/ BRT 
i.  Inner PRR  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
17-8 
3. Development of Intermodal Station  
a. Intersection of Kanakpura Road and Inner PRR at Raghuvanahalli village  
4. Accessibility Improvement Plans  
5. Preparation of Parking Plans for Commercial Areas/ Places :  
a. Kanakpura Road 
b. Inner PRR  
6. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes and Streams:  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Preparation of Lakes & Streams Rejuvenation Plan : 
i. RMP2031 Streams Rejuvenation Plan 
ii. Konanakunte Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
iii. Avalahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
iv. Krishna Nagar Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
v. Chunchugatta Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Surrounding Area development plan to be prepared to upgrade the drainage and 
sewage infrastructure to stop flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as 
dumping of SWM.  
7. Preparation of Slum Redevelopment Plans  
8. Declaration of Street Vending Zones / Areas / Streets 
9. Development of Physical Infrastructure / Facilities: 
a. SWM  Dry Waste Collection Centres:  10 No.s 
b. SWM Bio-Methanation Unit:   1 No. 
c.  SWM  Organic Waste Collection Centres:  1 No. 
d. SWM Aggregator :     1 No. 
e. SWM Coconut Waste Processing Plant :  1 No. 
f. SWM Integrated Waste Processing Plants :  1 No. 
g. 22kv Sub-Station:     1 No. 
h. Fire Station:                                                          1No. 
i. Regional or Large Scale Park:                            1 No. 
j. Sports Complex:                                                  1 no. 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
18-1 
18. PD 17: NAYANADAHALLI 
Population (2011 Census): 2,49,522  
Area of PD: 2423.7  ha 
Wards in PD: 3 Wards (full) 2 Wards 
(part) 
Gross Density: 102 pph  
 
The Nayanadahalli (PD number 17) is 
located in South Western part of BMA 
and falls within the BBMP limits. It is 
bounded by the NICE Expresssway at its 
South side.   
This PD is predominantly Public Semi-
Public and Residential areas.  
 
Tha RMP2031 proposes densificaton of 
the residential areas in a regulated 
manner with better acesss to parks and 
open spaces.  
 
1. The Nayanadahalli PD comprises of 5 wards in total; with 3 full wards of Nagarabhavi (128) , 
Jnanabharathi Ward (129), Nayandanahalli (131), and 4 part wards of Deepanjali Nagar (15 8) 
and Rajarajeshwari Nagar (160). Some major landmarks are in this PD are Bangalore 
University and Rajarajeshwari Arch. 
2. The urban character of this PD, is low rise, high density in the residential areas in the north 
and south of the PD, while the central part is of Publi-Semi-Public areas. 
3. Educational institutions such as Bangalore University, Institute of Social and Economic 
Change, National Law School etc. are the major landmarks in this PD. 
4. Mysore road cuts across the centre of the PD, while the Outer Ring Road (partly) and 
University road (old outer ring road) are the other major roads in this PD. Tumkuru road and 
NICE Expressway also can be accessed from this PD. 
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography 
1. As per Census 2011, PD 17 has a population of 249522, which has increased by 102 % from 
the year 2001 (123242). The total resident workers in this PD are 1,10,100, which makes up 
44% of the population.  

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
18-2 
2. There are 62,034 households in this PD, with average household size 4.02 which i s very 
similar to the average household size in BMA (4.01). The Gross density is 102 pph an d the 
Residential density is 398 pph. 
Industry and Commerce 
3. There are industrial areas along Mysore road including BHEL (PSU), Gopalan Mall, and 
scattered industrial and commercial areas. There are about 1 lakh workers residing in the PD. 
Existing Land Use  
4. The predominant land uses are Residential and Public & Semi Public use covering 24.5 9% and 
22.48% of area respectively. The Public –semi-public land use zone consisting of 8.6% area 
mainly consists of government offices. The area under transportation is ~9.5%. The total area 
under commercial land use is ~5%.  The area under water bodies and streams is 6.28 % of the 
total area. Figure 18- 1 and Table 18-1 presents the Existing land Use Map and Existing land 
Use Analysis respectively. 
Figure 18-1: PD 17 Existing Land Use Map  
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
18-3 
Table 18-1: PD 17 Existing Land Use Area Statement    
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 596.08 24.59 
Commercial 88.41 3.65 
Industrial 72.54 2.99 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 544.93 22.48 
Pubic & Semi Public - Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 39.02 1.61 
Parks & Open Spaces 41.07 1.69 
Transport and Communication 267.61 11.04 
Vacant 731.09 30.16 
Agriculture 0.00 0.00 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 26.80 1.11 
Water Bodies 16.16 0.67 
Total 2423.71 100.00 
Housing and Slums 
5. The residential character if low rise and high dense in areas such as Channappa layout , 
Chandana layout, Annapoorneshwari nagar, Arunachalam layout, Vishveshwariah layout, 
Benachakallupalya, ITI Employees layout, Chandra layout, Chandra layout extension, 
Vinayaka Extension, and low rise but medium dense in Railway layout, Mueshwaranagar, 
Remco Bhel layout, BEML layout, Janakshi layout, There are several housing layouts such  as 
ITI layouts, Arunachalam layout, NGEF layout, etc.  
6. There are 15 slums located in the PD out of which 3 are notified and 3 are n on-notified. The 
share of slum population to the total population is 12.63%. 
Traffic and Transportation 
7. The PD is accessible by Mysore Road, which is one of the major arterial roads connecti ng the 
core city and leading out towards Kengeri, part of Outer Ring Road, University road (o ld outer 
ring road) The PD is bound by Magadi road on the north and NICE road (BMIC) o n the east 
and south east. 
8. Nayanadahalli Railway Station and two Phase I Metro Stations of Mysore road metro station 
and Nayandahalli metro station. 
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
9. As per BWSSB the percentage of households having metered water supply connections  is 
48.1%  and the percentage of households having metered sewage connections i s 27.2%, 6 
number of GSLR and 2 Sewage Treament Plants, and 5 number of Pumping stati on and 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
18-4 
borewells located in this PD. There are 3 Dry Waste Collecetion Centres and 1 22 0kV 
substation. 
10. Social Infrastructure in this PD is:   107 schools and colleges and institutions such as the 
Bangalore University. There are 18 hospitals and public health centres (government and 
private) such as Gangothri Nursing Home. There are 2 police stations and 1 fire s tation in this 
PD. 
Park and Open Spaces 
11. 1.68% of the land area is under parks and open spaces. More parks and open spaces are 
required in this PD. There are several neighborhood level parks but there are no major ci ty 
level parks in this PD. 
Lakes and Drainage 
12. Vrishabhavathi River cuts across the PD and there are five lakes (as part of the Byramangala 
lake series): Halgevaddarahalli Kere, Nayanadahalli Kere, Deepanjali Kere and 
Srigandhakavalu (Rajiv Gandhi Nagara) Kere, and Utarahalli Lake in the PD. 
13. There are a few low-lying points identified by the SWD Master Plan (prepared by Storm 
Water Department, BBMP), along the Vrishabhavati river and in the valleys near the lakes, 
which are vulnerable to flooding. 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS : ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION, DECONGESTION, TRANSIT INTEGRATION  
PROPOSALS 
 
1. The PD falls under the Planning Zone B which is a proposed to be a Consolidati on Zone. The 
governing principal in this PD is to streamline traffic flow, stabilize commercialization of 
residential areas and preserve the existing natural features.  
2. Figure 18-2 and Table 18-2 presents the Proposed Land Use Map and the Proposed Land Use 
Area Analysis respectively. 
3. The RMP2031 proposes city level public transport infrastructure such as Metro / MRT along 
Outer Ring Road passing within this PD.  
4. The RMP2031 propos es 1 Intermodal Interchange hub at Nyandanahalli – Mysore road 
junction  
5. Transit Oriented Development Zone is proposed to be applicable around all Metr o rail / 
LRT/Mono Rail stations/terminals located in the Planning District. 
6. Towards parking, RMP2031 proposes that a detailed parking plan be prepared by BBMP.  
7. In order to improve the accessibility to Public Transport Stations (Metro, BMTC Bus Stations) 
it is proposed to strengthen the road network by providing footpaths and cycle tracks. Thi s 
shall greatly enhance first and last mile connectivity to the Public Transport Stations.  
8. RMP2031 proposes overall geometric improvement of certain roads which inclu des uniform 
right of way and cross –section, provision of Pedestrian and wherever possible NMT facilities. 
Also include improvement of junction on these roads. This roads are a) Mysore Road  b) Outer 
Ring Road. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
18-5 
9. The RMP2031 hasidentified 1 road junctions that are to be taken up for geometri c 
improvements for better and smoother traffic flow at the Nayandahalli junction. 
10. RMP2031 proposes that a detailed parking plan be for Mysore Road. 
11. The RMP2031 recognizes the present status of slums and potential for Redevelopment of 
Slums to be taken up. 
12. The open spaces and parks are proposed to be maintained and given good accessibili ty and 
improvement in parking facilities. 
 
Figure 18-2: PD 17 Proposed Land Use Map 
 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
18-6 
Table 18-2: PD 17 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 1032.73 42.61 
Commercial 54.05 2.23 
Industrial 60.14 2.48 
Public & Semi Public 504.92 20.83 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 30.17 1.24 
Parks / Open Spaces 113.87 4.70 
Transport & Communication 307.41 12.68 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 26.60 1.10 
Water Bodies 15.71 0.65 
NGT Buffer 278.09 11.47 
Total Developable Area 2423.71 100.00 
Agriculture 0 - 
Total PD Area 2423.71 - 
 
13. As mentioned earlier, entire PD drains into Vrushabhavati River. The natural drainage within 
the PD have been classified as following:  
a. Drainage downstream from multiple lakes namely Nayandahalli kere, 
Halagevaderahalli kere and Hoskerehalli kere - Seconda ry 
b. Other drainage/ streams leading to secondary streams (as marked in PLU)  - Tertiary 
14. The RMP2031 proposes that these streams  be kept free of all encumbrances, sludge, SWM, 
and no sewage be allowed to flow into the streams and lakes. It is therefore proposed that all 
lakes  be properly interconnected and rejuvenated. 
15. The RMP2031 proposes the lake protection and rejuvenation of Halgevaddarahalli  Kere, 
Nayanadahalli Kere, Deepanjali Kere and Srigandhakavalu (Rajiv Gandhi Nagara) Kere, and 
Utarahalli Lake its natural streams by preparing lake and surrounding area development plan.  
16. To provide comfort to pedestrians and improve street aesthetics, the RMP20 31 proposes 
road side and avenue plantation for arterial roads, sub-arterial and important roads.  
17. RMP2031 proposes that BBMP, in accordance to the provisions of Street Vend ing Act, 2015, 
determine the areas for informal activities/ street vending and detailed upgradatio n plans for 
such areas/ roads/ streets are prepared. 
 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 h asbroken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD17: Nayanadahalli 
1. Road Development Plan  
a. RMP2031 Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Category - 1 
Roads and other categories in phased manner.  
b. Upgradation of Master Plan Roads 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
18-7 
i. Outer ring road, 
ii.  Mysoru road,  
iii. University road (old outer ring road) 
iv. ITI Layout main road 
v. Malathahalli lake road 
c. Junction Improvement Programme 
i. Nayandahalli junction at Mysuru road. 
2. Development of Public Transport System :  
a. Namma Metro  
i. Metro Phase II: Extension along Mysuru Road; with 2 proposed metro 
stations of RR Nagar metro station and Bangalore University Cross metro 
station. 
ii.  Metro Phase II: along Outer Ring Road 
3. Development of Intermodal Stations : 
a.  Intersection at Nyandanahalli – Mysore road junction  
4. Accessibility Improvement Plans:   
a. For Planned Metro Stations 
5. Preparation of Parking Plans for Commercial Areas/ Places :  
a. Outer Ring Road 
b. Mysuru Road  
6. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes and Streams:  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Preparation of Lakes & Streams Rejuvenation Plan : 
a. RMP2031 Streams Rejuvenation Plan, 
b. Halgevaddarahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan, 
c. Nayanadahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan, 
d. Deepanjali Kere Rejuvenation Plan, 
e. Srigandhakavalu Rejuvenation Plan ,  
f. Utarahalli Lake Rejuvenation Plan 
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Surrounding Area development plan to be prepared to upgrade the drainage and 
sewage infrastructure to stop flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as 
dumping of SWM.  
7. Preparation of Slum Redevelopment Plans.  
8. Declaration of Street Vending Zones / Areas / Streets. 
9. Development of Physical Infrastructure / Facilities: 
a. SWM  Dry Waste Collection Centres:  08No.s 
b. SWM  Organic Waste Collection Centres:  2 No.s 
c. SWM Aggregator:     1 No. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
19-1 
19. PD 18: PEENYA - NAGARBHAVI 
Population (2011 Census): 5,16,075 
Area of PD: 2144.90 ha 
Wards in PD: 10 
Gross Density: 240.6 pph 
 
Peenya – Nagarbhavi Planning District 
(PD 18) is located in the western parts 
of BMA between Tumukuru Road and 
Mysore Road. It characterised by 
presence of large Industrial Areas such 
as Peenya, dense residential areas, 
commercial activities along the roads, 
educational institutes and 
Vrishabhavatii River.  
 
The RMP2031 proposes to consolidate 
the development in the area and 
streamline transportation and infrastructure and increase p ublic transport share in this 
Planning District. 
1. The Peenya - Nagarbhavi PD is spread across the either side of the western reach of the 
Outer Ring Road and it comprises of 10 BBMP wards – namely Kamakshipalya (101), 
Kaveripura (103), Shakthiganapathi Nagar (74), Shankaramata (75), Vrushabhavathi (102), 
Koigepalya (73), Laggere (69), Peenya Industrial Area (41), Rajagopala Nagar (70) and 
Moodalapalya (127).   
2. The urban character of this PD is low rise with high density in the industrial areas ( Peenya & 
Doddanna industrial area) located in the northern part of PD and high density residential 
areas in the rest of the PD (Nagarbhavi.) The National Institute of Unani Medicine i s the 
educational institution that is located here. 
3. Outer Ring Road, Magadi Road are the major arterial roads in this PD. 
 
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography 
4. As per Census 2011, PD 18 has population of 5,16,075 with a decadal growth o f 71.1% (2001-
2011).  The worksforce particication rate is 48.45% of the population. The gross densi ty has 
increased to 240.6 persons per hectare (in 2011) from 140 pph (in 2001), whereas the 
residential density is 698 pph. The gross density is highest in Shakthiganapathi ward (no  74) 
(626 pph) and the least in Peenya Industrial Area ward (103 pph). 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
19-2 
5. There are 1,35,709 households (2011), with average household size of 3.8, which is lower 
than average household size of BMA (4.01).  
Industry and Commerce 
6. The Peenya Industrial Area established by the GoK in the 1960s and agglomerated as p rivate 
industrial estate is the hub for Machine Tools in India. It is one of the major employment 
centres in the city. Peenya (Phase 3 & 4), Kamashipalya and Doddana Industrial Area and 
other private industrial estates provide employment mainly in small and medium 
enterprises/ industries. Magadi Road is an industrial axis, which also houses workers involv ed 
in industrial and manufacturing activities - especially of textile and garments. Some o f 
hazardous industries are located in Peenya Industrial Area. 
7. Workplaces like retail and office spaces are present along major roads. The major commerci al 
nodes in this PD are Magadi Road Market and Sanjeevinagar Market. The Industrial areas are 
slowly going in transition mode from Industrial/ manufacturing to services/ o ffice spaces due 
to demand for office spaces. An opportunity lies for redevelopment of small industrial estates 
with full involvement of stakeholders. 
Existing Land Use  
8. The predominant land uses is residential use covering 34.83 \%. The Industrial land u se zone 
consists of 17.94 % area followed by the area under transportation and vacant land whi ch are 
14.59 % and 14.22 % respectively. The total area under commercial land use is 4.8%. The area 
under water bodies and streams is 6.28 % of the total area.  
Figure 19-1 and Table 19-1 presents the Existing Land Use Map and Existing Land Use Analysis 
for PD 18.  
Housing and Slums 
9. PD 18 is primarily residential, containing parts of BDA layouts such as Vijayanagar,  
Rajajinagar, Basaveshwaranagar West of Chord Road and Nagarabhavi. The residential urban 
fabrics are diverse: the BDA Layouts have a well planned grid of streets and  parks and 
playgrounds, while other neighborhoods, for example, Indira Nagar Colony or NGO Colony, 
are dense and disorganized mostly due to the topography and the presence of th e old street 
pattern in urban villages. Kurubarahalli and Kamakshypalya in the east of the PD in clude 
some vacant lands and slums. 
10. The total number of households residing in residential areas is 1,35,709  (Census 2011), with 
5,16,075 inhabitants. The residential density is 698 pph. The gross density i s highest in 
Shakthiganapathi Ward (74) with 626 pph. 
11. There are 22 slums locate din this PD out of which 9 slums are notified sl ums. The population 
residing in the slums is 47,195 ( 9.14% of the total PD population) 
Traffic and Transportation 
12. The Transport Infrastructure include BMTC Bus services at Kamashipalya, Nagarbhavi Stage II 
(Sumana- halli Juncion), and 1 Bus Depot at Kamala Nagar on ORR and / or KHB Colony. 
Sumanahalli junction on ORR and Havanur junction require improvements. 
13. The area is well connected by BMTC bus services from Shankar Nag Bus Terminal, Shard a 
Colony Bus Terminal, Bande Marramma Bus Stand, Peenya 2nd Stage Bus Stand , Peenya 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
19-3 
Industrial Area and Kamala Nagar Bus Depots, Laggare Bus Station, Anubhavanagara Bus 
Stations and several bus stops.  
There are only two major arterial roads – Outer Ring Road and Magadi Road, which are 
followed by local roads. Heganhalli-Andralli Main Road, Pateghar Palya Mai n Road and other 
road continuous road are functioning as second order roads that have im pediments for free 
traffic movement within the PD.  
 
Figure 19-1: PD 18 Existing Land Use Map 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
19-4 
Table 19-1: PD 18 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 746.98 34.83 
Commercial 103.32 4.82 
Industrial 384.71 17.94 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 150.70 7.03 
Pubic & Semi Public - Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 7.03 0.33 
Parks & Open Spaces 29.28 1.36 
Transport and Communication 312.89 14.59 
Vacant 353.13 16.46 
Agriculture 0.00 0.00 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 21.61 1.01 
Water Bodies 35.26 1.64 
      
Total 2144.90 100.00 
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
14. As per BWSSB the percentage of households having metered water supply connections  is 
37.64% and the percentage of households having sewage connections is 21.83%, 7  number of 
GSLR and 3 Pumping station and borewells located in this PD. As per BBM P, there are 9 Dry 
Waste Collection Centres. As per KPTCL, there is 1 220kV substation located in this PD. 
15. Social infrastructure in this PD is: 221 schools and colleges and educational institu tes such as 
MS Ramaiah School of Advanced Studies, the Hosmat College of Physiotherapy, the National  
Institute of Unani Medicine, the Dr Ambedkar Institute of Technology and Indian Insti tute of 
Plantation Management, are present in PD area. Further, there are 3 Government Health 
Centres & Hospitals and 22 private hospitals and 3 numbers of police stations in this PD. 
Park and Open Spac es 
16. There are several small parks and open spaces located in the planned layouts but no Major 
Park/ play- ground for general public. The land under Central Relief Committee, National 
Institute of Unani Medicine and other vacant lands and land with plantations ar e relief points 
in highly dense urban development. 
Lakes and Drainage 
17. The Vrishabhavathii River flows through contoured terrain and the PD drains into the ri ver. 
Nallakadirenahalli Lake, Narasappanahalli Lake, Basappana Katte Lake, Shivapura Lake, 
Pilappanahalli lake, Balayyana Katte lake and Nagarabhavi Lake are the major lakes in this 
Planning District. These lakes are highly polluted and some of them have developments.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
19-5 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: DECONGESTION AND CONSOLIDATION, TRANSIT INTEGRATION  
PROPOSALS 
1. The Proposed Land Use Map and the Proposed Land Use Area Statement are presented in 
Figure 19-2 and Table 19- 2. 
2. The RMP2031 proposes city level public transport infrastructure such as Metro/MRT and 
LRT/Mono Rail/BRT along roads within the Planning District. They are the following: 
a. Metro/MRT: Phase II Metro services proposed by BMRCL along the Outer Ring Road . 
b. LRT/ Mono Rail/ BRT: is proposed along the Magadi Road. 
3. The RMP2031 proposes 1 Intermodal Interchange at junction of Magadi Road  and Outer Ring 
Road at at Summanahalli. 
4. Transit Oriented Development Zone is proposed to be applicable around all Metr o rail 
stations/terminals located in the Planning District. 
5. In order to improve the accessibility to Public Transport Stations (Metro, BMTC Bus Stations) 
it is proposed to strengthen the road network by providing footpaths and cycle tracks. Thi s 
shall greatly enhance first and last mile connectivity to the Public Transport Station s. 
6. RMP2031 proposes overall geometric improvement of certain roads which incl udes uniform 
right of way and cross section, provision of Pedestrian and wherever possible NM T facilities. 
Also include improvement of junction on these roads. This roads are a) Magadi Road b ) Outer 
Ring Road 
7. The RMP2031 has identified 2 road junctions that are to be taken up for geometric 
improvements for better and smoother traffic flow. 
8. RMP2031 proposes that a detailed parking plan be for Magadi road and Sumanah alli near 
junction. 
9. The RMP2031 recognizes the present status of slums and potential for Redevelopment of 
Slums that needs to be taken up. 
10. A Regional Park / large scale park is proposed to be developed in the PD. The open spa ces 
and parks are proposed to be maintained and given good accessibility and improv ement in 
parking facilities. 
11. As mentioned earlier, entire PD drains into Vrushabhavati River. The natural drainage within 
the PD have been classified as following:  
a. Drainage downstream from Nandini layout leading towards Vrishabhavathi river -  
Secondary 
b. Other drainage/ streams leading to secondary streams (as marked in PLU) – Tertiary 
c. The RMP2031 proposes that these streams be kept free of all encumbrances, sludge, 
SWM, and no sewage be allowed to flow into the streams and lakes. It is therefore 
proposed that all lakes  be properly interconnected and rejuvenated. 
d. The RMP2031 proposes the lake protection and rejuvenation of Nallakadirenahalli  
Lake, Narasappanahalli Lake, Basappana Katte Lake, Shivapura Lake, Pilappanahalli 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
19-6 
lake, Balayyana Katte lake and Nagarabhavi Lake and its natural streams by preparing 
lake and surrounding area development plan.  
Figure 19-2: PD 18 Proposed Land Use Map 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
19-7 
Table 19-2: PD 18 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 972.23 45.33 
Commercial 52.17 2.43 
Industrial 329.65 15.37 
Public & Semi Public 133.79 6.24 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 25.68 1.20 
Parks / Open Spaces 39.19 1.83 
Transport & Communication 335.65 15.65 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 21.22 0.99 
Water Bodies 35.23 1.64 
NGT Buffer 200.10 9.33 
Total Developable Area 2144.90 100.00 
Agriculture 0 - 
Total PD Area 2144.90 - 
 
12. To provide comfort to pedestrians and improve street aesthetics, the RMP20 31 proposes 
road side and avenue plantation for arterial roads, sub-arterial and important roads.  
13. RMP2031 proposes that BBMP, in accordance to the provisions of Street Vend ing Act, 2015, 
determine the areas for informal activities/ street vending and detailed upgradatio n plans for 
such areas/ roads/ streets are prepared. 
14. RMP2031 proposes Disaster & Hazard Mitigation Plan for low lying areas of Koig epalya, 
Moodalpalya, Kullegowda Industrial Area, Area near Mount Senoria School, Muniswara  
Nagar, and Nagarbhavi to urban flooding, fire, & emergency situations, posing  risk to Human 
Safety and Economic Losses. It therefore proposed that Disaster & Hazard Mitigation Pl an 
(DHMP) may look into but not limited to: 
a. Providing Means of Access to Emergency Services 
b. Facilitating Easy Evacuation of Local People (residents and working people) 
c. Providing Infrastructure/ facilities like Fire Hydrants, Assembly Areas, mini-fire 
stations, provision for Ambulance, etc 
d. Imposition of Certain Restricting posing risk to Humans and Economy 
e. Circulation Pattern/ Defined Movement of Vehicular Traffic and Non-Vehicular 
Traffic.  
f. Stations Area/ Accessibility Improvement Plan 
g. Upgradation of Physical Infrastructure (Development roads, underground cabling of 
power lines, telecommunication lines, Disc TV/ DTH cables, optic fiber, etc.  
h. Parking Plan & Development of MLCP 
i. Time Restrictions on carrying out certain activities and business, etc 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
19-8 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects f or every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD18 : Peenya - Nagarbhavi 
1. Road Development Plan  
a. RMP2031 Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Category - 1 
Roads and other categories in phased manner.  
b. Upgradation of Master Plan Roads 
i. Outer ring road, 
ii.  Magadi road,  
iii. Heganhalli-Andralli Main Road,  
iv. Pateghar Palya Main Road 
 
c. Junction Improvement Programme 
i. Sumanahalli junction, 
ii. Havanur junction in Basaveshwarnagar 
2. Development of Public Transport System :  
a. Namma Metro  
i. Metro Phase II: along Outer Ring Road with stations on Summanahalli 
junction, Laggegere bridge junction. 
 
b. LRT / Mono Rail/ BRT 
i. Along Magadi Road 
3. Development of Intermodal Stations : 
a.  1 station at junction of Magadi Road and Outer Ring Road at Summanahalli. 
 
4. Accessibility Improvement Plans:   
a. For Planned Metro Stations 
5. Preparation of Parking Plans for Commercial Areas/ Places :  
a. Outer Ring Road 
b. Mysuru Road  
 
6. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes and Streams:  
d. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification  of 
the RMP2031 .  
e. Preparation of Lakes & Streams Rejuvenation Plan : 
a. RMP2031 Streams Rejuvenation Plan, 
b. Nallakadirenahalli Lake Rejuvenation Plan, 
c. Narasappanahalli Lake Rejuvenation Plan, 
d. Basappana Katte Rejuvenation Plan, 
e. Shivapura Lake Rejuvenation Plan ,  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
19-9 
f. Pilappanahalli lake Rejuvenation Plan. 
g. Balayyana Katte lake Rejuvenation Plan and  
h. Nagarabhavi Lake Rejuvenation Plan 
f. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Surrounding Area development plan to be prepared to upgrade the drainage and 
sewage infrastructure to stop flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as 
dumping of SWM.  
7. Preparation of Slum Redevelopment Plans.  
 
8. Declaration of Street Vending Zones / Areas / Streets. 
 
9. Development of Physical Infrastructure / Facilities: 
a. SWM  Dry Waste Collection Centres:  20 No.s 
b. SWM Organic Waste Collection Centres:  03 No. 
c. 220 kV Substation:                                              01 No. 
10. Preparation of Disater and Hazard Mitigation Plan   
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
20-1 
20. PD 19- JALAHALLI – JARAKABANDEKAVAL 
                                    
Population (2011 Census): 2,97,125 
Area of PD: 2555.76 ha 
Wards in PD: 6 No.s 
Gross Density: 116 pph 
Jalahalli – Jarakabandekaval 
(Planning District No.19) lies in the 
North Western periphery of BBMP, 
within BMA. This PD is characterised 
by the presence of Airforce Station 
at Jalahalli, Jarakabandekaval State 
Forest, Peenya Industrial Area 
(part), PSUs, educational institution, 
and some   residential layouts. 
The RMP2031 proposes network 
development, densificaton in few 
areas, transit integration and 
environment protection.  
1. The Planning District Jalahalli – Jarakabandekaval consists of six wards Kuvempunagar (11), 
Sheihalli (12) Mallasandra (13), Bagalakunte (14), T Dasarahalli (15), and Chokkasandra (39) 
and covers the Dasarahalli and Yelahanka Zones of BBMP.  
2. The urban charcatr is low rise and high density in the residential areas. 
3. Tumkur Road ( NH 4), Hessarghata Main Road (SH 39 ) Subroto Mukerjee Road are the major 
arterial roads passes through this planning district. 
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography 
4. As per Census 2011, PD 19 a population of 2,97,125 with a decadal growth rate  80.81% 
(2001- 2011). The owrkforce participation rate is 45.65% of the population. The gross d ensity 
is 116 persons per hectare (pph), whereas the average residential density is 495 pph. The 
gross density is highest in T. Dasarahalli ward (375 pph) while the least is in Kuvem pu Nagar 
(49 pph). 
5. There are 1,57,878 households (2011), with average household size of 3 .82, which is lower 
than BMA average (4.01).  
Industry and Commerce 
6. The presence of airforce station, Peenya Industrial Phase 2 (part), private industrial  areas/ 
Industries like Gurunanjundaiah Industrial Area and Kenna- metal India, Comm ercial Units 
along main roads and educational institutes are the major employment centres in this PD. 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
20-2 
Existing LandUse 
7. The predominant land uses are vacant landuse and residential landuse with 24.98 % and  
23.66 % of land area respectively. The Public and semi public - unclassi fied use consists of 
16.87 % area followed by the area under transportation which is 8.45 %. The total area und er 
industrial land use is 5.15 %/  The area under agriculture and forest is 5.19 % an d 5.89 % 
respectively. Figure 20-1 and Table 20-2 present the Existing Land Use Map and Existin g Land 
Use area statement respectively. 
Figure 20-1: PD 19 Existing Land Use Map 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
20-3 
Table 20-1: PD 19 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 604.69 23.66 
Commercial 70.32 2.75 
Industrial 131.52 5.15 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 5.41 0.21 
Public Semi Public 75.48 2.95 
Pubic & Semi Public - Unclassified 431.26 16.87 
Public Utility 12.39 0.48 
Parks & Open Spaces 21.98 0.86 
Transport and Communication 215.92 8.45 
Vacant 771.22 30.18 
Agriculture 0.00 0.00 
Forest 150.56 5.89 
Streams 5.36 0.21 
Water Bodies 59.65 2.33 
Total 2555.76 100.00 
 
Housing and Slums  
8. Residential land use (23.66 %) and layouts dominate the housing pattern with hi gh densities, 
however, high rise residential buildings are also present. HMT Layout, MEI Layout, 
Nagasandra, Mallasandra, Chikkasandra, Sidedahalli, Dasarahalli, Abbigere, shetyhalli, 
K.G.Bagalakunte, etc are predominantly residential in nature.  
9. There are 16 slums located in this PD out of which 4 are notified slums. T he ward with most 
number of slums is Kuvempu Nagar (11) with 5 slums located within it. The po pulation 
residing in the slums is 18416 (6.2% of total PD population). There is a ri sk of fire hazard in 
the highly dense wards and slums. 
Traffic and Transportation 
10. The transport infrastructure in this PD includes Chikabanavara Railway station. As proposed  
by BMRCL, the metro alignment of Phase II of Namma Metro has coverage withi n this PD 
which is extension of Purple line on Tumukuru road.  
11.  The NH4 Tumkur Road, Hessarghata Main Road (SH 39), pipeline road, Subroto Mukerjee  
Road (SH39) are the major arterial roads passes through this planning district.  
 
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
12. As per BWSSB, the percentage of households having metered water supply connections 
14.2% and percentage of households having metered sewage connections is 9.3%, 2 GSLR 
and 1 Sewahe Treatment Plant. As per BBMP, there are 4 DWCC and 1 Bio-methanation Unit. 
13. Social Infrasrtucture in this PD is: 104 schools and number of educational and rese arch 
institutions such as the Electronic Training Institute of Indian Air Force, Varalakshmi College 
of Nursing, Sapthagiri Collage of Engineering, Soundarya Institute of Management & Science , 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
20-4 
RR Polytechnic, etc are present. Further, 16 private and Government hospitals, 1 fire station 
and 4 burial grounds located in this PD. 
Parks and Open Spaces 
14. The reserved forest of Jarkabande Kaval sandal reserve of the Bangalore Forest Ran ge lies in 
this planning district, adding to its green open space. There are neighbourhoo d parks in the 
residential layouts and playgrounds like MEI & HMT Layout ground. 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: NETWORK DEVELOPMENT, TRANSIT INTEGRATION, DENSIFICATION, 
REDEVELOPEMENT, AND ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION.  
PROPOSALS 
1. The governing principal for planning this PD is to consolidate the existing  vacant land for 
densification, road network development. While doing so, the RMP2031 al so focuses on road 
network development, transit integration and environment protection.Figure 20 -2 and Table 
20-2 presents the Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
respectively.  
Figure 20-2: PD 19 Proposed Land Use Map 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
20-5 
Table 20-2: PD 19 Proposed Land Use Area Statement  
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 1107.04 43.52 
Commercial 43.07 1.69 
Industrial 96.12 3.78 
Public & Semi Public 68.15 2.68 
Unclassified 404.08 15.88 
Public Utility 11.83 0.47 
Parks / Open Spaces 59.57 2.34 
Transport & Communication 275.32 10.82 
Forest 148.35 5.83 
Streams 5.04 0.20 
Water Bodies 59.03 2.32 
NGT Buffer 266.27 10.47 
Total Developable Area 2543.88 100.00 
Agriculture 11.88 - 
Total PD Area 2555.76 - 
 
2. The RMP2031 proposes city level public transport infrastructure such as Metro/MRT and 
LRT/Mono Rail/BRT along roads within the Planning District. They are the following: 
a. Metro/MRT Phase II: OnTumukuru road with 3 metro stations. 
b. LRT/ Mono Rail/BRT: SH 39 (Hesarghatta Main road and Andrahalli main road) with 6 
stations in this planning district.  
c. Commuter Rail System: at Chikbanavara railway junction 
3. RMP2031 proposes impoved road network connectivity with road proposal bet ween 
Abbigere and pipeline road. 
4. The RMP2031 proposes 1 Intermodal Interchange at 8th Mile T Dasarahalli junction on 
Tumkur road and at Chikbanavara station.  
5. Transit Oriented Development Zone is proposed to be applicable around al l Metro rail, 
LRT/Mono Rail/ BRT stations/terminals located in the Planning District. 
6. In order to improve the accessibility to Public Transport Stations (Metro, BMTC Bus Stations) 
it is proposed to strengthen the road network by providing footpaths and cycle tracks. Thi s 
shall greatly enhance first and last mile connectivity to the Public Transport Station s. 
7. RMP2031 proposes overall geometric improvement of certain roads which inclu des uniform 
right of way and cross section, provision of Pedestrian and wherever possib le NMT facilities 
along with i improvement of junction on roads of a) Hesarghatta Main Road, Pipelin e Road, b) 
Handrihalli main road. 
8. The RMP2031 has identified 1 road junctions that are to be taken up for ge ometric 
improvements for better and smoother traffic flow. 
9. As mentioned earlier, entire PD drains into Arkavathi River and T.G.Halli catchment. The  
natural drainage within the PD have been classified as following:  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
20-6 
a. Drainage downstream from Mallasandra lake and Bagalagunti lake 2 towards 
secondary streams connecting the Arkavati River - Tertiary 
b. Drainage downstream from Dasarahalli lake via Doddabidirakallu lake 8 toward s a 
secondary stream connecting the Arkavati River  - Tertiary 
10. The RMP2031 proposes that these streams  be kept free of all encumbrances, sludge, SWM, 
and no sewage be allowed to flow into the streams and lakes. It is therefore proposed that all 
lakes be be properly interconnected and rejuvenated. 
11. The RMP2031 proposes the lake protection and rejuvenation of Kammagaundanah alli kere, 
Mallasandra kere, Dasarahalli tank, Abbigere Lake, Shingapur Kere, Bagalkunte Kere and its 
natural streams by preparing lake and surrounding area development plan.  
12. The RMP2031 proposes the protection of the forest areas – Jarakbande Kaval. The open 
spaces and parks are proposed to be maintained and given good accessibility and 
improvement in parking facilities. 
13. The RMP2031 recognizes the present status of slums and potential for Redevelopment of 
Slums that needs to be taken up. 
14. Tha RMP2031 proposes physical infrastructure, for Solid Waste Management of 11 DWCC, 4 
OWCC, 1 AGGR, 2 BMU, 1 CPU and 1 IWPU in this planning distri ct. Additionally, the 
RMP2031 proposes 1 220 kV power substation, 1 fire station in this planning di strict.  
15. To provide comfort to pedestrians and improve street aesthetics, the RMP20 31 proposes 
road side and avenue plantation for arterial roads, sub-arterial and important roads.  
16. RMP2031 proposes that BBMP, in accordance to the provisions of Street Vend ing Act, 2015, 
determine the areas for informal activities/ street vending and detailed upgradatio n plans for 
such areas/ roads/ streets are prepared. 
 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD 19: Jalahalli – Jarakabandekaval. 
1. Road Development Plan: Road Development as envisaged as Master Plan level for 
development and implementation of Master Plan roads. Road development plan is to be 
prepared for all Master Plan roads .  
a. RMP2031 Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Catego ry -1 
Roads.  
b. Upgradation of Roads: 
i. Pipeline road,  
ii. Hesarghatta main road,  
iii. Handrihalli Main road and  
iv. Nagasandra main road 
v. Development of link from Abbigere and pipeline road 
c. Junction Improvement Plan  
i. T Dasarahalli 8th Mile Junction  
2. Development of Public Transport System 
a. Metro Phase II: on Tumkuru road with Nagasandra metro station, Dasarahalli met ro 
station , Jalahalli metro station. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
20-7 
b. LRT/ Mono Rail/ BRT: SH 39 with stations at Chikbanavara, Bagalgunte, Saptagiri 
College of Engg,  8th Mile T Dasarahalli, Nagasandra Cross , Handrihalli Circle. 
c. Commuter Rail System: at Chikbanavara railway junction 
3. Development of Intermodal Stations:  
a. Chikkabanavara junction  
4. Accessibility Improvement Plans:   
a. For Planned Metro Stations 
5. Preparation of Parking Plans for Commercial Areas/ Places :  
b. Tumkur Road 
c. Pipeline Road 
d. Hesarghatta Road 
6. Area Redevelopment : 
a. Ravindranagar Slum – Mallasandra 
b. Muneswar Block Slum 
c. Ramachandrapura Slum 
7. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes and Streams:  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Preparation of Lakes & Streams Rejuvenation Plan : 
a. RMP2031 Streams Rejuvenation Plan, 
b. Dasarahalli Lake Rejuvenation Plan, 
c. Abbigere Lake Rejuvenation Plan, 
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Surrounding Area development plan to be prepared to upgrade the drainage and 
sewage infrastructure to stop flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as 
dumping of SWM.  
8. Preparation of Slum Redevelopment Plans. 
9. Declaration of Street Vending Zones / Areas / Streets. 
10. Development of Physical Infrastructure / Facilities: 
a. SWM  Dry Waste Collection Centres:  11 No.s 
b. SWM Organic Waste Collection Centres:  04 No. 
c. SWM Aggregator:                                                01 No. 
d. SWM Central Processing Unit:                          01 No. 
e. SWM IWPU:                                                          01 No. 
f. 220 kV Substation:                                              01 No. 
g. Fire Station:                                                          01 No. 
11. Preparation of Disaster and Hazard Mitigation Plan : 
a. Urban Flooding Mitigation Plan for areas that are vulnerable to flooding al ong 
Tumukuru road and surrounding areas 
b. Development of Mini-Fire Station :  A mini fire station is proposed to be developed to 
reduce the vulnerability of the PD to fire.  
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
21-1 
21. PD 20:  YELAHANKA  
Population (2011 Census): 2,26,985 
Area of PD: 5429.44 Ha 
Wards in PD: 5  
Gross Density: 42.8 pph 
Planning District 20 is located in the 
northern side of the BMA planning area 
and is between Hessarghata Main Road 
and Hennur Main Road. The PD is 
spatially structured around the NH 
7(Bellary road) and SH9 (Yelahanka main 
road). The PD is predominantly 
characterised by large institutional 
campuses, system of lakes and well 
planned residential layouts. Also there 
are large tracts of vacant land (28.91%) 
and Agricultural land (21.12%). The 
RMP2031 proposes further densification 
and integration with transit system .  
  
1. The Yelahanka PD extent admeasures 5429.44 ha and comprises of 5 wards namely 
Kempegowda (1), Chowdeshwari (2), Atur (3), Yelahanka Satellite (4) and Jakkur (5). 
2. The Yelahanka new town, and part of the Yelahanka airbase are located in this pl anning 
district. 
3. The Bengaluru- Mumbai highway and the proposed Peripheral Ring Road alignment  passes 
through this PD.  
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography 
4. As per Census 2011, PD 20 has population of 2,26,985 with a dedacadal growth rate of 
97.49% (2001- 2011) and work force participation rate of 42.09 % o f the population. The 
gross density is 41.8 pph, whereas the average residential density is 271.90 p ph. The gross 
density is highest in Yelahanka Satellite ward (86pph) and the least in Jakkur ward (22 p ph). 
5. There are 55,728 households (2011), with an average household size of 4.1, which higher 
than BMA (4.01).  
Industry and Commerce 
6. Rail-wheel Factory, Pharmaceutical manufacturers, small scale apparel and plastic industries 
are the predominant industrial activities and in total accounts for 4.04%. 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
21-2 
Existing LandUse  
7. Vacant land Use is the predominant land use at 29.21 % while Agriculture and al lied activities 
accounts for 20.92 % of the total PD area. Residential land use takes up 16.19 % of the area.  
Transport/Communication Land Use accounts for 6.98 % of the total land area. P ublic-Semi 
Public constitutes 6.17 % while public semi-public unclassified accounts f or 4.6 % of the total 
landuse area. Figure 21- 1 and Table 21- 1 presents the Existing Land Use Map and  Existing 
Land Use area statement respectively. 
Transportation  
8. The transport infrastructure in this PD includes BMTC bus services with autos, cabs act as  
feeder services 
9. As proposed by BMRCL, metro alignment of Phase IIhas coverage within this PD from the city 
towards BIAL via Bellary road.  
10. NH - 7 Bellary Main Road connects one from the city to BIAL and Hyderabad , and SH9 
Doddaballapur Main Road connects one to Yehlahanka and further Doddaballapur.  Bellary 
road is punctured by 2 sub arterial roads from the east which are Kogilu road and Bagalur u 
main road. 
Figure 21-1: PD 20 Existing Land Use Map 
 
 
 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
21-3 
Table 21-1: PD 20 Existing Land Use Area Statement  
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 872.42 16.07 
Commercial 88.52 1.63 
Industrial 221.41 4.08 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 77.85 1.43 
Public Semi Public 334.91 6.17 
Pubic & Semi Public - Unclassified 249.49 4.60 
Public Utility 23.22 0.43 
Parks & Open Spaces 81.39 1.50 
Transport Communication 393.73 7.25 
Vacant 2713.65 49.98 
Agriculture 0.00 0.00 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 13.89 0.26 
Water Bodies 358.90 6.61 
Total 5429.38 100.00 
 
Physical and Social Infrastructure  
11. As per BWSSB, the percentage of households having metered water supply connections 
14.76% and percentage of households having metered sewage connections is 17.5 %, 2 GSLR 
and 2 Sewag e Treatment Plants and 4 Pumping Stations and Borewells. As per BBMP, there 
are 2 DWCC and 2 land fills are located. 
12. There are 114 schools in the PD. The important educational institutes in the P D are REVA 
University, VIBGYOR, Shristi School of design. Further, 17 private and Government hospitals , 
1 fire station, 3 police stations and 2 burial grounds located in this PD. 
Parks and Open Spaces  
13. This PD, Yelahanka New town has ample green spaces but there is a need for pro vision of 
larger parks and open spaces at PD level. Provision of adequate parks, playground and open 
spaces for future population needs to be planned while protecting the lake and  valley system 
is imperative. 
Lakes and Drainage 
14. The lakes in this PD are Yelahanka Lake, Atur Lake, Putanahalli Lake, Jakkur Lake , Kogilu Lake 
and Allalasandra Lake. 
 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: NETWORK DEVELOPMENT, TRANSIT INTEGRATION, DENSIFICATION AND 
DISASTER MITIGATION, ENCIRONMENT PROTECTION AND CREATION OF PARK AND OPEN 
SPACES. 
PROPOSALS 
1. The governing principles for PD are 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
21-4 
a. Radial based High Density Development 
b. Netwrok Development while integration with existing development 
c. Public transport development and integration 
2. Figure 21-2 and Table 21-2 presents the Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land  Use 
Area Statement respectively.  
Figure 21-2: PD 20 Proposed Land Use Map  
 
Table 21-2: PD 20 Proposed Land Use Area Statement  
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 2794.22 51.46 
Commercial 99.74 1.84 
Industrial 172.78 3.18 
Public & Semi Public 347.78 6.41 
Unclassified 247.77 4.56 
Public Utility 18.49 0.34 
Parks / Open Spaces 228.91 4.22 
Transport & Communication 664.37 12.24 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 11.98 0.22 
Water Bodies 339.00 6.24 
NGT Buffer 504.40 9.29 
Total Developable Area 5429.44 100.00 
Agriculture 0 - 
Total PD Area 5429.44 - 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
21-5 
3. The RMP2031 proposes city level public transport infrastructure such as Metro/MRT and 
LRT/Mono Rail/BRT along roads within the Planning District. They are the following: 
a. Metro/MRT: Metro alignment to Kempegowda International Airport (KIAL) which is 
an extension of Nagwara Metro Line (of Phase II, BMRCL) along Bellary road. 
b. Metro/MRT: along the Peripheral Ring Road.  
c. LRT/Mono Rail/BRT: along the Major Sandeep Unnikrishnan Road. 
d. Commuter Rail System: along Yelahanka railway station. 
4. Further, to improve overall connectivity within and with other areas outside planning d istrict 
following improvements are proposed network connectivity enhancement: 
a. Inner Peripheral Ring Road: along Major Sandeep Unnikrishnan Road. 
b. Road geometry and Junction improvement: RMP2031 proposes overall g eometric 
improvement of certain roads which includes uniform right of way and cross –section, 
provision of pedestrian and wherever possible NMT facilities. The Masterplan also 
proposes improvement of junction on these roads of Major Sandeep Unnikrishnan 
Road. 
5. The RMP2031 proposes 1 Intermodal Interchange at at intersection of PRR and Bellary road . 
6. Transit Oriented Development Zone is proposed to be applicable around all Metro rail, LRT / 
BRT stations/terminals located in the Planning District. 
7. In order to improve the accessibility to Public Transport Stations (Metro, BMTC Bus Stations) 
it is proposed to strengthen the road network by providing footpaths and cycle tracks. Thi s 
shall greatly enhance first and last mile connectivity to the Public Transport Station s. 
8. Re-development of areas like Allalasandra, Bestara colony south of Yelahanka Kere, Kovempu 
nagar, is proposed to be taken-up.  
9. It is proposed that Slum Redevelopment be carried out in phased manner for all slums in a 
phased manner. 
10. The PD drains into the Hebbal Valley important natural drains within the PD are classified as 
follows: 
a. Drainage downstream of Yelahanka lake via Jakkuru  leading towards Rachenahalli lake 
further continuing towards Rampura lake -Primary 
b. Drainage downstream from Singanayakanahalli Ammanikere towards Harohalli lake 
connecting the Hebbal primary stream -  Secondary 
c. Other drainage/ streams leading to secondary streams (as marked in PLU) - Tertiary 
11. The RMP2031 proposes that these streams be kept free of all encumbrances, sludge, SWM , 
and no sewage be allowed to flow into the streams and lakes. It is therefore proposed that all 
lakes be properly interconnected and rejuvenated. 
12. The RMP2031 proposes the lake protection and rejuvenation of Yelahanka Lake, Atur L ake, 
Putanahalli Lake, Jakkur Lake, Kogilu Lake and Allalasandra Lake its natural streams  by 
preparing lake and surrounding area development plan.  
13. RMP2031 proposes 1 Regional Park/ large scale park in this PD. The open spaces and parks 
are proposed to be maintained and given good accessibility and improvement in  parking 
facilities. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
21-6 
14. The RMP2031 recognizes the present status of slums and potential for Redevelopment of 
Slums that needs to be taken up. 
15. Tha RMP2031 proposes physical infrastructure, for Solid Waste Management of 7 DWCC, 3 
OWCC, 2 AGGR, and 1 IWPU and 1 CWPU in this planning district. Additionally , the RMP2031 
proposes 1 220 kV power substation, 3 Nos STPs and 1 No. ISPS in this planning di strict. 
16. RMP2031 proposes that BBMP, in accordance to the provisions of Street Vend ing Act, 2015, 
determines the areas/ streets for Informal activities/ Street Vending activities an d prepares 
detailed up gradation plans for such areas/ roads/ streets. 
17. RMP2031 proposes Disaster & Hazard Mitigation Plan for low lying areas of south of 
Yelahanka Kere. 
18. To improve green cover and provide comfort to pedestrians and improve street aesthetics, 
the RMP2031 proposes road side and avenue plantation for arterial roads, sub -arterial and 
important roads. 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD 20: Yelahanka 
1. Road Development Plan:   
a. RMP2031 Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Catego ry -1 
Roads.  
b. Upgradation of Master Plan roads: 
i. Major Sandeep Unnikrishnan Road,  
ii. New Town Road,  
iii. Doddaballapur road and  
iv. Kogillu road.   
2. Development of Public Transport System:  
a. Namma Metro:  
i. KIAL Alignment on Airport Road 
ii. Along Peripheral Ring Road 
iii. LRT/ Mono Rail / BRT: Major Sandeep Unnikrishnan Road,  
iv. CRS: Yelahanka railway station 
3. Development of Intermodal Interchange Stations:  
a. At intersection of PRR and Bellary road and Bellary road.  
12. Preparation of Slum Redevelopment Plans. 
13. Declaration of Street Vending Zones / Areas / Streets. 
14. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes and Streams:  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification  of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Preparation of Lakes & Streams Rejuvenation Plan : 
a. RMP2031 Streams Rejuvenation Plan, 
b. Yelahanka Lake Rejuvenation Plan, 
c. Atur Lake Rejuvenation Plan, 
d. Putanahalli Rejuvenation Plan 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
21-7 
e. Jakkur Lake Rejuvenation Plan 
f. Kogilu Lake Rejuvenation Plan 
g. Allalasandra Lake Rejuvenation Plan 
15. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Surrounding Area development plan to be prepared to upgrade the drainage and sewage 
infrastructure to stop flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as dumping of SWM.  
16. Development of Physical Infrastructure / Facilities: 
a. SWM  Dry Waste Collection Centres:             07 No.s 
b. SWM Organic Waste Collection Centres:       03 No. 
c. SWM Aggregator:                                               02 No. 
d. SWM Coconut Waste Processing Unit:           01 No. 
e. SWM Integrated Waste Processing Unit:        01 No. 
f. 220 kV Substation:                                              01 No. 
g. Sewage Treatment Plan:                                    03 No. 
h. Intermediate Sewage Pumping Stations:        01 No. 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
22-1 
22. PD 21: MARENAHALLI – KANNUR 
                                    
Population (2011 Census): 28,594 
Area of PD: 3132.2 ha 
Gramathanas  in PD: 12 
Gross Density: 06 pph 
Marenahalli Planning District (PD 21) is 
located in the North-Eastern side of 
BMA between Hennur Main Road and 
Kadda Agrahara Main road. PD is 
predominantly agricultural with large 
quarry and mining sites. It shares its 
boundary with BIAPPA and Hoskote 
Planning Authority. 
The RMP2031 proposes limited growth 
along Peripheral Ring Road while 
retaining the Agriculture Zone and 
Development of Regional Park. 
 
1. The Marenahalli – Kannur PD extent admeasures 3132.2 Ha and falls within Bidarahalli and 
Jalla Hoblis and comprises of 12 villages namely Marenahalli, Bagalaru, Chagal ai, 
Dasanayakanahalli, Mitaganahalli, Kannuru, Kadasonnappanahalli, Doddenahalli, 
Yarappanahalli, Nadagavadagollahalli, Chikkagubbi and Bommasandra. 
2. This PD is in the peripheral parts of BMA. Major portion of the area is under agricultural  use. 
The proposed PRR alignment is to the south of this PD. 
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography 
3. As per Census 2011, PD has population of 17,420 with a decadal growth rate of 47 .3% (2001-
2011). (11,825). The work force participation rate is 44.5% of the populati on. The gross 
density is 5.64 persons per hectare (pph), whereas the average residential density is 153.80 
pph. The gross density is highest in Kadasonnappanahalli village (15pph) and the l east in 
Doddenahalli village which is uninhabited 
4. There are 3,829 households (2011), with an average household size of 4.5, which hi gher than 
BMA (4.01). 
Industry and Commerce 
5. Agriculture, livestock rearing, stone quarrying and cement block factories are th e 
predominant industrial activities seen in this PD. Hosur Bande, a live granite quar ry located in 
Mittaganahalli village has quarrying activities and cement block factories. 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
22-2 
Existing LandUse 
6. The predominant landuse in this planning district is Agriculture Zone that acc ounts for 55.61 
%.  Figure 22- 1 and Table 22- 1 presents the Existing Land Use Map and Existing Land Use 
area statement respectively. 
Housing and Slums 
7. Marenahalli is the largest Gramthana followed by Kannuru and Yarrapanahalli which is 
witnessing planned residential development in the form of lay- outs. Squatter settlements 
and temporary housing have sprung up around the Hosur Bande quarry site mai nly for the 
workers. There are no slums in this PD. 
Traffic and Transportation 
8. Hennur Main road, Chikkagubi Main road, Kadda Agrahara Main road and other vi llage roads 
provide connectivity within ana outside the PD.  
9. The major forms of public transport provided by BMTC buses while autos, cabs act as fee der 
services.  
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
10. Marenahalli PD does not have metered water or sewage connections and is largely  
dependent on water tankers.  
Figure 22-1: PD 21 Existing Land Use Map  
 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
22-3 
Table 22-1: PD 21 Existing Land Use Area Statement  
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 113.60 3.63 
Commercial 12.38 0.40 
Industrial 59.82 1.91 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 223.21 7.13 
Unclassified 32.06 1.02 
Public Utility 0.03 0.00 
Parks & Open Spaces 5.05 0.16 
Transport and Communication 109.83 3.51 
Vacant 629.10 20.09 
Agriculture 1741.85 55.61 
Forest 132.04 4.22 
Streams 4.38 0.14 
Water Bodies 68.82 2.20 
Total 3132.20 100.00 
 
11. Social infrastructure in this PD is: 17 schools located in the PD. The major educational 
institutions include schools like Oasis international school, BM English School and  colleges 
like Alpha Đollege of EŶgiŶeeƌiŶg, KoshǇ͛s Đollege of ŶuƌsiŶg aŶd ŵaŶageŵeŶt aŶ d FaƌaŶ 
College of nursing and 1 fire station. 
Lakes and Drainage 
12. The lake system located in the PD drains to the Pennar River onto the Krishnagiri d am and 
further joins the Cauvery River. The important lakes located in the PD are Kannuru Lake, 
Chikka Gubbi Lake and Bagaluru Lake (which is just outside the PD boundary). 
Parks and Open Spaces 
13. Parks and Open Spaces account for a negligible share of land in this planning district. To the 
east of the PD is government reserved forest land at Marrenahalli village which extend s 
outwards of the BMA boundary and is the largest open space. Provision of adequate parks, 
playground and open spaces for future population needs to be planned while p rotecting the 
lake and valley system is imperative. 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: PRESERVATION OF AGRICULTURE BELT, PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ALONG 
PRR, VILLAGE DEVELOPMENT, DEVELOPMENT OF REGIONAL PARK 
PROPOSALS 
1. The RMP2031 proposes preservation of agriculture zone with limited developm ent along 
PRR, conversion of Quarry site into Regional Park and Gramthan Development are the guiding 
principles of this PD. The Proposed Land Use Map and and Proposed Land Use  area 
statement are presented in Figure 22-2 and Table 22-2 respectively.  
2.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
22-4 
Figure 22-2: PD 21 Proposed Land Use Map 
 
Table 22-2: PD 21 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 369.29 72.78 
Commercial 11.78 2.32 
Industrial 7.09 1.40 
Public & Semi Public 13.06 2.57 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 0.00 0.00 
Parks / Open Spaces 7.70 1.52 
Transport & Communication 52.42 10.33 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 0.63 0.12 
Water Bodies 6.06 1.19 
NGT Buffer 39.37 7.76 
Total Developable Area 507.41 100.00 
Agriculture 2624.79 - 
Total PD Area 3132.20 - 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
22-5 
3. The RMP2031 proposes city level public transport infrastructure passes through this P lanning 
District. They are as following: 
a. Metro/MRT: along the Peripheral Ring Road.  
b. BRTS: along the Hennur – Bagaluru road which is proposed as the alternative 
connectivity to the KIAL airport.  
4. In order to improve the accessibility to Public Transport Stations (Metro, BMTC Bus Stations) 
it is proposed to strengthen the road network by providing footpaths and cycle tracks. Thi s 
shall greatly enhance first and last mile connectivity to the Public Transport Station s. 
5. The RMP2031 proposes village development for Marenahalli, Bagaluru, Chagalai , 
Dasanayakanahalli, Mitaganahalli, Kannuru, Kadasonnappanahalli, Doddenahalli, 
Yarappanahalli, Nadagavadagollahalli, Chikkagubbi and Bommasandra. The village 
development plan would include Infrastructure Development within Gramathana, 
development of Gramathana peripheral road, development of village roads (to impr ove 
accessibility), lake rejuvenation and lake area development, development of SWM faciliti es, 
etc.  
6. The PD drains into the Hebbal Valley important natural drains within the PD are classified as 
follows: 
a. Drainage downstream of Kannuru Lake1 towards Doddagubbi lake2 - Secondary 
b. Other drainage/ streams downstream along the valley towards the BMA boundary - 
Tertiary 
7. The RMP2031 proposes that these streams  be kept free of all encumbrances, sludge, SWM, 
and no sewage  allowed to flow into the streams and lakes. It is therefore proposed that  all 
lakes  be properly interconnected and rejuvenated. 
8. The RMP2031 proposes the lake protection and rejuvenation of Kannuru Lake, Chikka Gub bi 
Lake and Bagaluru Lake. 
9. Hosur Bande, a large stone quarry is proposed for redevelopment to a regional park. Existing 
mining activities to be banned and the quarry will serve the purpose o f a regional park for 
BMA. The natural depression and contours of the quarry could be used to create a natural ly 
landscape park or could even facilitate adventure sports.  
10. RMP2031 proposes 1 Regional Park/ large scale park in this PD. The open spaces and parks 
are proposed to be maintained and given good accessibility and improvement in  parking 
facilities. 
11. Considering the water tables are comparatively low in the northern portion of BMA, it is 
proposed to make rain water harvesting systems mandatory for all new developments.  
12. To meet the additional power requirements within the PD a one 220 KV substation  is 
proposed in the PD. 
13. To meet the fire safety requirements within the PD a fire-station is proposed to be 
developed.  
14. To meet the requirements for present and future waste generation, new solid waste 
ŵaŶageŵeŶt iŶfƌastƌuĐtuƌes aƌe pƌoposed ǁhiĐh iŶĐludes ϯ Ŷeǁ DWCC͛s at 
Kadosonappanahalli, Marenahalli, Yarappanahalli villages and 1 new OWCC.  
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
22-6 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD 20: Yelahanka 
1. Road Development Plan:   
a. RMP2031 Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Catego ry -1 
Roads.  
b. Upgradation of Master Plan roads: 
i. Hennur – Bagaluru road 
ii. Chikkagubi Main road 
iii.  Kadda Agrahara Main road 
2. Development of Public Transport System:  
a. Namma Metro:  
i. Along Peripheral Ring Road 
b. BRT on Hennur – Bagaluru road 
3. Village Development Plans for all village within the PD. 
4. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes and Streams:  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification  of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Preparation of Lakes & Streams Rejuvenation Plan : 
a. RMP2031 Streams Rejuvenation Plan, 
b. Kannuru Lake Rejuvenation Plan, 
c. Chikka Gubbi Lake Rejuvenation Plan, 
d. Bagaluru Lake Rejuvenation Plan 
5. Lake Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream Surrounding Area 
development plan to be prepared to upgrade the drainage and sewage infrastructure to stop 
flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as dumping of SWM.  
6. Development of 1 Regional Park at quarry site of Hosur Bande 
7. Development of Physical Infrastructure / Facilities: 
a. SWM  Dry Waste Collection Centres:             03 No.s 
b. SWM Organic Waste Collection Centres:      01 No. 
c. 220 kV Substation:                                             01 No. 
d. Fire Station:                                                         01 No. 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
23-1 
23. PD 22: BIDARAHALLI 
Population (2011 Census): 23,314  
Area of PD: 3216 .94  ha 
Gramthana in PD: 13 
Gross Density: 07 pph 
 
Bidarahalli Planning District (PD 22) is 
located in the north-eastern side  of 
BMA planning area between Dodda 
Gubbi Main Road and Old Madras Road. 
This PD shares boundary with 
tehHoskote LPA. 
 
RMP 2031 proposes growth along the 
PRR and preservation of Agriculture 
Zone. 
 
1. The PD falls completely within Bidarahalli Hobli. The PD comprises of 13  villages namely Kada 
Agrahara, Anagalapura, Byappanahalli, Vaddarahalli, Adooru, Bidarahalli, Ramapura, Huvina 
Ane, Maragondanahalli, Kithaganooru, Hale halli, Hirandahalli, Doddagubbi (Srigubbi).  
2. Avalahalli Main Road and Kethigannur Main Road are the two main roads in the PD. 
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography 
3. As per Census 2011, PD has a population of 23,314 with decadal growth rate of  66.30 % 
(2001- 2011). The work force participation rate is 42.82% of the popul ation. The gross density 
is 7.22 persons per hectare (pph), whereas the average residential density is 137.3 6 pph. The 
gross density is highest in Maragondanahalli village (16 pph) and the least i n Huvina Ane 
village which is uninhabited 
4. There are 5,252 households (2011), with an average household size of 4.4, which hig her than 
BMA (4.01). 
Industry and Commerce 
5. Agriculture, livestock rearing, brick kilns, engineering-mild steel welding an d small scale 
industries (2.11%) are the predominant industrial activities seen in the PD. 
Existing LandUse 
6. The predominant landuse in this planning district is under Agriculture Zone. is characterised 
predominantly by the agricultural hinterland of BMA (52.76%), large tracts of v acant lands 
(26.46%) and large lakes (6.05%). Figure 23-1 and Table 23-1 presents the Existi ng Land Use 
Map and Existing Land Use area statement respectively. 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
23-2 
Figure 23-1: PD 22 Existing Land Use Map 
 
Table 23-1: PD 22 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 169.40 5.27 
Commercial 15.01 0.47 
Industrial 35.48 1.10 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 28.96 0.90 
Public Semi Public 53.48 1.66 
Pubic & Semi Public - Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 0.98 0.03 
Parks & Open Spaces 44.86 1.39 
Transport Communication 128.02 3.98 
Vacant 777.35 24.16 
Agriculture 1759.43 54.69 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 9.18 0.29 
Water Bodies 194.74 6.05 
Total 3216.90 100.00 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
23-3 
Housing and Slums  
7. Residential land use accounts for 3.63 %. Hirandahalli is the largest Gramthana followed by 
Bidarahalli which has upcoming planned residential development. Also seen are paying guest 
accommodations around the educational institutions like East Point Enginee ring College and 
Garden City College. 
 
Traffic and Transportation 
8. Avahalli Main Road, Kethi Ganur Main Road and a small stretch of Old Madras Road (OMR) 
and village roads provide connectivity within and outside the PD. The m ajor forms of public 
transport provided by BMTC buses while autos, cabs act as feeder services.  
 
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
9. The PD does not have metered water supply or sewage connections.  
10. The Social Infrastructure in this PS is 27 schools and educational institutions include East 
point engineering college, Garden City College and Indus Valley Residential School. There is a 
lack of adequate social infrastructure in the PD like health care facilities and govern ment 
schools. However there is potential for development of social infrastructure due to  
availability of land. 
 
Lakes & Drainage 
11. The Hebbal lake system located in the PD drains to the Pennar River onto the Krishnagiri  dam 
and further joins the Cauvery River. The wetland system seen is part of the Yelemall apa 
Chett y lake series.  
12. The lakes in this PD are home to rich bio-diversity but are under threat due to un sustainable 
development. The important lakes located in the PD are Rampura Lake (half of the lake i s 
located in the PD), Yelemallapa Chety lake(portion of it), Kitaganur Lake, Bidarahalli  Lake and 
Gunduru Lake. 
 
Parks and Open Spaces 
13. There are no formal parks and open spaces. The provision of adequate parks, playground and  
open spaces for future population needs to be planned while protecting the lake and valley 
system is imperative. 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: HIGH DENSITY DEVELOPMENT ALONG PRR, PRESERVATION OF 
AGRICULTURE ZONE, DEVELOPMENT OF REGIONAL PARK AND GRATHANA DEVELOPMENT AND 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION. 
PROPOSALS 
1. Given the characteristics of the planning district and directions from RMP2031, the gui ding 
principles for formulating the proposals for the PD are  
a. Promotion of high density development along PRR. 
b. Environment protection and Gramthana development. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
23-4 
2. Figure 23-2 and Table 23-2 presents the Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use area 
statement respectively.  
Figure 23-2: PD 22 Proposed Land Use Map 
 
Table 23-2: PD 22 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 835.79 42.54 
Commercial 40.97 2.09 
Industrial 61.36 3.12 
Public & Semi Public 153.67 7.82 
Unclassified 
 0.00 
Public Utility 4.00 0.20 
Parks / Open Spaces 164.84 8.39 
Transport & Communication 286.45 14.58 
Forest 
 0.00 
Streams 7.10 0.36 
Water Bodies 119.65 6.09 
NGT Buffer 290.86 14.80 
Total Developable Area 1964.69 100.00 
Agriculture 1252.24 - 
Total PD Area 3216.93 - 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
23-5 
3. The RMP2031 proposes city level public transport infrastructure passes through this P lanning 
District. They are as following: 
a. Metro/MRT: along the Peripheral Ring Road.  
b. LRT/ BRT: along the Inner Peripheral Ring Road  
4. The road network developmentproposed is as under: 
a.  A BMRDA proposed 100m wide Intermediate Ring Road (IRR) has been included with  
certain modifications looking into ground situation. 
b. The PRR and the Inner PRR pass through the center of the PD clearly defining the pattern 
of development. The road network has been developed accordingly. 
c. Chanasandra Main Road which goes onto become Kada Agrahara Main Road is proposed 
as a 30m wide road which connects one towards Hoskote LPA.  
5. It is proposed to retain the agriculture zone on the northern side. However in order to 
provide facilities within villages, it I sproposed to prepare a Village Development Plan. 
6. The PD drains into the Hebbal Valley important natural drains within the PD are classified as 
follows: 
a. Drainage downstream of Rampura lake towards Yele mallappa chetty lake - Primary 
b. Drainage downstream of Bayappanahalli Lake 4 to connect Hebbal primary stream -   
Secondary 
c. Other drainage/ streams leading to primary/secondary streams (as marked in PLU) - 
Tertiary 
7. The RMP2031 proposes that these streams  be kept free of all encumbrances, sludge, SWM, 
and no sewage  allowed to flow into the streams and lakes. It is therefore proposed that all 
lakes  be properly interconnected and rejuvenated. 
8. The RMP2031 proposes the lake protection and rejuvenation of Rampura Lake. 
9. Development of a Regional Park in the valley between Rampura and Yellama llappa Chetty 
Lake. This is to protect the valley system and improve green cover. 
10. It is proposed that water and sewage network plan is prepared for areas falling within the 
conurbation area for planned network development. 
11. To meet the additional power requirements within the PD a one 220 KV substation  is 
proposed in the PD. 
12. To meet the requirements for present and future waste generation, new solid waste 
management infrastructures are proposed which includes 10 DWCC, 2 OWCC and 1 Bio-
Methanation Unit. 
 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD 22: Bidarahalli. 
1. Road Development Plan:   
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Catego ry -1 
Roads.  
b. Junction improvement for intersections of existing and masterplan roads. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
23-6 
2. Development of Public Transport System:  
a. Namma Metro:  
i. Along Peripheral Ring Road 
b. LRT/BRT on Inner Ring Road 
c. BRT on Kada Agrahara Road 
3. Preparation of Village Development Plans for all villages within the  PD. 
4. Development of Regional Park 
5. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes and Streams:  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification  of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Preparation of Lakes & Streams Rejuvenation Plan : 
a. RMP2031 Streams Rejuvenation Plan, 
b. Rampura Lake Rejuvenation Plan, 
c. Kitaganur Lake Rejuvenation Plan, 
d.  Bidarahalli Lake Rejuvenation Plan and  
e. Gunduru Lake Rejuvenation Plan 
6. Lake Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream Surrounding Area 
development plan to be prepared to upgrade the drainage and sewage infrastructure to stop 
flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as dumping of SWM.  
7. Development of Physical Infrastructure / Facilities: 
a. SWM  Dry Waste Collection Centres:             10 No.s 
b. SWM Organic Waste Collection Centres:      02 No. 
c. SWM Bio-Methanation Unit:                           1 No. 
d. 220 kV Substation:                                             01 No. 
8. Prepration of water supply and sewage network plan for conurbation areas.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
24-1 
24. PD 23: CHEEMASANDRA SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT 
ZONE  
Population (2011 Census): 39,377  
Area of PD: 2729 .41  ha 
Villages in PD: 17 
Gross Density: 14.4 pph 
Cheemasandra Planning District (PD 
No. 23) is located in the North-
Eastern side of BMA between Old 
Madras Road (NH4) and Whitefield 
Main road. It is characterised 
predominantly by existing agricultural 
use, large tracts of vacant land and 
industrial activity at Cheemasandra. 
PD boundary is shared with LPA of 
Hoskote Planning Authority. 
The RMP2031 proposes development 
of special development zone promoting 
high density planned employment 
centres and residential development. 
1. The Planning District comprises of 17 villages namely Veeranahalli, Kurudasonnenahalli, 
Cheemasandra, Katamnalluru, Bhanadapura, Konadasapura, Goravigere, Bidare 
Agraharavu Chikkanagenahalli, Doddabanahalli, Kannamangala,  Dommasandra, 
Chikkabanahalli, Sheegihalli, Nimbekayipura, Avalahalli, Kumbena Agrahara and 
Kajisonnenahalli. 
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography 
2. As per Census 2011, PD has 39,377 inhabitants, which has increased by 82.84 % from 
2001(21,536). There are 18,333 resident workers which account for a work forc e 
participation of 46.56% which is higher than the BMA average of 44.5%. Ther e are 12772 
households (2011), with an average household size of 3.1, which is lower than BMA average 
(4.01). The gross density is 14.4 persons per hectare (pph), whereas the average residential 
density is 168 pph.  The gross density is highest in Aavalahalli village (45 pph)  and the least is 
in Dommasandra village (3 pph). 
Industry and Commerce 
3. The PD has very sparse commercial land use . There is scattered industrial development in 
the planning district seen around Cheemasandra and Virgonagar Indu strial area. Food 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
24-2 
processing, glass industries and some manufacturing industries ar e the predominant 
industrial activities seen in the PD. 
Housing and Slums  
4. Kannamangala is the largest Gramthana followed by Cheemasandra and Sheegihalli which  is 
witnessing planned residential development in the form of gated communities  and plotted 
development. High rise apartments are seen along Old Madras Road (NH4). 
Traffic and Transportation  
5. Old Madras Road (NH4), SH 35 and Budigere Main road and village roads provide 
connectivity within and outside the PD. The major forms of public transport are BMTC 
buses and a few private buses, while autos, cabs act as feeder services. No BMTC depot/ 
KSRTC bus depot is present in the PD area. The PRR alignment has been proposed through 
this PD and will trigger future development in the PD. A well planned road network would 
provide better connectivity in the future. 
Existing LandUse 
6. The predominant landuse in this planning district is agriculture (53.26%) follow ed by vacant 
(19.29%). Residential use within the PD account for 10.29%. Figure 24-1 and Table 24-1 
presents the ExistingLand Use Map and Existing Land Use Analysis for the Planning District. 
Figure 24-1: PD 23 Existing Land Use Map  
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
24-3 
Table 24-1: PD 23 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 280.45 10.29 
Commercial 29.87 1.10 
Industrial 54.47 5.67 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 154.68 1.24 
Unclassified 33.93 1.24 
Public Utility 4.92 0.18 
Parks & Open Spaces 16.90 0.62 
Transport and Communication 96.77 3.55 
Vacant 526.39 19.29 
Agriculture 1453.55 53.26 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 7.13 0.26 
Water Bodies 124.81 4.57 
Total 2729.28 100.00 
Physical and Social Infrastructure  
7. Public and Semi Public land uses account for 1.23% as per the existing land use 2015. There 
are 17 schools located in the PD. There is a lack of adequate social infrastructure in the PD 
like health care facilities and government schools. There is a fire station located in the PD. 
Parks and Open Spaces 
8. There are inadequate parks and open spaces. T he provision of adequate parks, playground 
and open spaces for future population needs to be planned while protecting the lake and 
valley system is imperative. 
Lakes & Drainage 
9. The wetland system seen in this PD is part of the Yelemallapa Chety series. The lakes in this 
PD are home to rich bio-diversity but are under threat due to unsustainable development. 
The important lakes located in the PD are Yellamallappa Chety Lake and Chikkabanahalli 
Lake. 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT ZONE WITH PLANNED HIGH DENSITY GROWTH 
AND ENABLING ECONOMIC GROWTH, INTEGRATION OF CITY CIRCULATION NETWORK, AND 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION .  
1. PD is under constant flux as developments are following radial as well as scat tered 
development pattern. It becomes imperative that RMP2031 directs for planned urban 
development and promotion of economic growth along proposed major Ring and Radials.  
2. RMP2031 proposes development of various economic nodes/ special de velopment zones 
across BMA and PD Halanayanakahalli – Kodathi is one of these nodes/ zones proposed to be 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
24-4 
development. The guiding principles for developing PD as Special Develo pment Zone is as 
following: 
a. Promotion of Economic Growth along Rings/ Radials  
b. Development of Grid Pattern Circulation System allowing higher FAR consumption  
c. Promotion of Transit Oriented Development around Metro/ Mono Rail Stations  
d. Protection and Conservation of Lake Systems 
e. Planned Open Spaces 
3. The Planning District has been designated as Special Development Zone and be go verned by 
special regulations as stipulated in Zoning Regulations.  
4. The Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use Distribution for the PD are depicted in 
Figure 24-2 and Table 24-2 respectively. The proposed land use has been designed to 
promote the economic activities along PRR, and major roads while residential use zone wou ld 
promote work live play concept. Park & open spaces have been distributed across the 
planning district and are mostly located around lakes.  
5. The PD is physically structured along Old Madras Road as a major arterial road. State 
Highway-35 is proposed to be extended to BIAL and will serve as a new l ink for people 
traveling from south Bengaluru. Once SH 35 touches Old Madras Road at Budigere Cr oss, it 
joins the Town Ring Road i.e Sivas Road and finally connects to BIAL vi a SH 104. In order to 
achieve a high intensity of development a grid based network system has been proposed.  
Figure 24-2: PD 23 Proposed Land Use Map 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
24-5 
Table 24-2: PD 23 Propsed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 1168.30 46.56 
Commercial 69.58 2.77 
Industrial 256.17 10.21 
Public & Semi Public 31.95 1.27 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 18.03 0.72 
Parks / Open Spaces 152.96 6.10 
Transport & Communication 364.98 14.55 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 6.77 0.27 
Water Bodies 113.42 4.52 
NGT Buffer 327.14 13.04 
Total Developable Area 2509.30 100.00 
Agriculture 220.2 - 
Total PD Area 2729.41 - 
 
6. Public Transport systems proposed are: 
a. LRT/ Mono Rail/ BRT on Old Madras Road 
b. LRT/ Mono Rail/ BRT on Inner PRR 
c. Metro on PRR 
7. RMP2031 proposes that the lakes within the PD namely Yellamallappa Chety Lake and 
Chikkabanahalli Lake are to be protected and conserved. The lakes fall under the Hebbal valley 
system.  
8. The streams leading to Yellappa Chetty lake from Rampura Lake and the down strea m of 
Yellappa Chetty lake= Primary. Other drainage/ streams leading to Hebbal primary  streams 
(as marked in PLU) = Tertiary. 
9. The RMP2031 proposes that these streams  be kept free of all encumbrances, sludge, SWM 
and no sewage  be allowed to flow into the streams and lakes.  
10. To meet the requirements for present and future waste generation, new solid waste 
management infrastructures are proposed whic h iŶĐludes Ϯϭ Ŷeǁ DWCC͛s, Ϯ OWCC͛s aŶd ϭ 
Bio Methanation Unit . 1 220 KV Sub-Station is proposed and 1 Fire Station is proposed  
 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD23: Cheemasandra planning District 
1. Road development plan 
a. Development of BMRDA regional link road with Town Ring Road of Hoskote LPA 
b. Junction improvement programme 
 Budigere Junction 
 Kattanallur Gate 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
24-6 
 Intersections of SH-35 and Gottikegere Road 
 Intersections of SH-35 and Seegihalli Road 
2. Proposed Public transport systems:  
 LRT/ Mono Rail/ BRT along Old Madras Road connecting to Hoskote 
 LRT/ Mono Rail/ BRT on Inner PRR 
 Proposed Metro Phase on PRR 
 ISBT- 1 no 
 Bus Station- 1 no  
3. Inter Modal Interchanges  are proposed at the junctions of Old Madras Road with PRR and 
Inner PRR and junction of Whitefield Main Road with PRR 
4. Logistic Hub and truck terminals are proposed within the PD 
5. Development of Regional Park within the buffers of Yellamallappa Chety Lake  
6. Lake rejuvenation and stream development plan is proposed  
7. Village development plans  for Veeranahalli, Kurudasonnenahalli, Cheemasandra, Katamna-  
lluru, Bhanadapura, Konadasapura, Goravigere, Bidare, Agraharavu Chikkanagenahalli, 
Doddabanahalli, Kannamangala, Dommasandra, Chikkabanahalli, Sheegihalli, 
Nimbekayipura, Avalahalli, Kumbena Agrahara and Kajisonnenahalli villages.  
8. Physical and Social Infrastructure  
a. To meet the requirements for present and future waste generation, new solid waste 
ŵaŶageŵeŶt iŶfƌastƌuĐtuƌes aƌe pƌoosed ǁhiĐh iŶĐludes Ϯϭ Ŷeǁ DWCC͛s, Ϯ OWCC͛s aŶd 
1 Bio Methanation unit.  
b. 1 220 KV Sub-Station is proposed  
c. 1 Fire Station is proposed  
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
25-1 
25. PD 24: VARTHUR – GUNJUR   
 
1. Planning District comprises of Varthur Ward of BBMP and Valepura village of Var thur Hobli 
and admeasures about 2870.20Ha.  
2. Old Airport Road/ Varthur Road, SH35, Balagere Road, Panathur Road/ Gunjur Palya Road / 
Gunjur-Mugalur Road, Muthasandra Main Road, Halasahalli Cross Road, Munnekoll al Main 
Road are some of the roads forming the connectivity network within the planni ng district. 
The Bengaluru – Salem railway line passes through PD with station at Belandur.  
3. The PD despite being opened for development by RMP 2015 still has large amount of vacant 
lands (about 67% of total PD area), which offers an opportunity for planned development and 
integrating existing developments. The Residential land use accounts for ~ 15% total P D area 
with majority of residential areas being located towards Outer Ring Road, Varthur Road 
(above Varthur kere), along SH35 and Balagere Road. Varthur, Balagere, Gunjur, Gunjur 
Palya, Panathur, Madhura Nagar, and Sorahunase are the major gramthanas that were 
merged with erstwhile BMP to form BBMP and are now large and dense urban set tlements. 
PD is witnessing large scale high end and high density residential developments a s well as has 
several schools and educational institutes run by both Government and private sector.  
A. Existing Status 
Demography 
4. As per Census, in 2011, PD had 55,838 inhabitants, which increased by decadal growth rate of 
115.1% (2001-2011). The work force participation rate is 42.2% of the total  PD population. 
Population (2011 Census): 55,838 
Area of PD: 2870.19 ha 
Wards in PD: 1 
Villages in PD: 1 
Gross Density= 20PPH 
 
Varthur - Gunjur Planning District (PD. No. 
24) is located in the south-eastern side of 
BBMP between Varthur Main Road and 
Sarjapura Main Road. It is witnessing 
heightened growth from eastern 
(Varthur/ SH35) and western sides (ORR 
Side), with large urban Gramathans and 
planned large scale developments - 
mostly residential.  
 
The RMP2031 proposes to develop the PD 
that would promote high density planned 
employment centres and residential 
developments, while protecting 
environmentally sensitive areas.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
25-2 
There are 14,571 households (2011), with an average household size of 3.83, which lo wer 
than BMA (4.01).  
5. The gross density is 19 persons per hectare (pph), whereas the average residential density is 
171.17 PPH.  
Industry and Commerce 
6. The PD has not seen much of commercial growth, and has very less commercial land use , 
which is concentrated along SH35 and partly on Varthur Road. There is a big vegetable an d 
wholesale market in Varthur.  
Exisitng Land Use  
7. Figure 25-1  and Table 25-1  presents the existing land use map 2015 and existing land use 
area statement for Planning District respectively.  
 
Figure 25-1: PD 24 Existing Land Use Map 
 
 
 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
25-3 
Table 25-1: PD 24 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 425.64 14.83 
Commercial 25.54 0.89 
Industrial 12.97 0.45 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 78.76 2.74 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 20.31 0.71 
Parks & Open Spaces 16.73 0.58 
Transport Communication 60.69 2.11 
Vacant 1926.42 67.12 
Agriculture 0.00 0.00 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 12.30 0.43 
Water Bodies 290.84 10.13 
Total 2870.19 100.00 
Housing and Slums 
8. The majority of residential areas being located towards Outer Ring Road, Varthur Road 
(above Varthur kere), along SH35 and Balagere Road. Varthur, Balagere, Gunjur, Gunjur 
Palya, Panathur, Madhura Nagar, and Sorahunase are the major Gramthanas (now part of 
BBMP). These are dense urban settlements. Further, large number of high end and high 
density residential complexes, private layouts and high rise apartments are coming up and 
will further increase the residential densities in future. The built form currently is low rise b ut 
in the upcoming developments it is high rises in gated communities. The g ross density is 19 
persons per hectare (pph), whereas the average residential density is 171.17 pph. The gross 
density in Varthur village is 20 pph followed by Valepura ward which is 16 pph.  
9. There 3 slums located in Varthur ward. The population residing in slums is 2 534 which 
accounts for 4.5% of the ward population.  
Traffic and Transportation 
10. As mentioned earlier, the Outer Ring Road (outside PD but close proximity to PD Old Airp ort 
Road/ Varthur Road, SH35, Balagere Road, Doddakannelli – Kadubeesanahalli Road, Panathur 
Road/ Gunjur Palya Road/ Gunjur-Mugalur Road, Muthasandra Main Road, Halasahall i Cross 
Road, Munnekollal Main Road, Bhoganahalli Road are the existing roads defin ing the 
connectivity network within the planning district. Panathur Road is main critical l ink between 
ORR and SH35, as it provides connectivity with ORR and other roads with in Planning Distri ct.  
11. Though outside the PD planning district, the Namma Metro ORR Blue Line (KR Puram Stretch 
to Silkboard) alignment is implemented by the BMRCL is located in the close proximity to this 
PD. Three planned metro stations at Deverabesanahalli, Kadubeesanahalli and Marathahalli 
are located near to PD. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
25-4 
12. The Bengaluru – Salem railway line passes through PD with a station at Belandur. The railway 
station is located to the western side of this PD.  There is one BMTC Depot located at Gunjur. 
Though there are several bus stops on existing roads, there is no bus statio n is available 
within the planning district.  
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
13. As per BWSSB, only ~8.6% of total households have metered water connections, whereas 
sewage connections is with only ~5.3% of total households. There is 1 ST P located to the 
south west of Varthur Lake along the Balagere road. As per BBMP, there is 1 Dry Wast e 
Collection Centre located in this PD. There is one electric crematorium located in Panathur   
14. There are 35 schools including some international schools, two collages - Gov ernment PU 
Collage and Krupanidhi Collage of Pharmacy, 2 Government healthcare centres and few 
private hospitals, within the PD.  
Park and Open Spaces 
15. The PD has predominant vacant land use and agriculture in nature but lacks any formal  large 
scale parks and open spaces. However, the valley downstream of Varthur kere is potential  
area for creating park and open space while protecting the valley.  
16. There is one private Badminton Academy within the planning district. Also, many of the 
upcoming gated communities are providing for open spaces within the campus.  
Lakes and Drainage 
17. Varthur Kere, Chikkabellanduru Kere, Panathur Kere, Gunjuru Kere, Gunjurpalya and 
Bhoganahalli Kere (last three are in Gunjur Revenue Village), are present in PD. All these lakes 
are within the Koramangala – Challaghatta Valley Watershed. All lakes within PD drain into 
Varthur Kere.  
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT ZONE WITH PLANNED HIGH DENSITY GROWTH 
AND ENABLING ECONOMIC GROWTH, INTEGRATION OF CITY CIRCULATION NETWORK, AND 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION. 
PROPOSALS 
1. This PD is witnessing rapid transformation. Developments, primarily residential in n ature, 
show different characteristics - a) the low rise residential areas as an extension of erstw hile 
gramathans, b) high rise apartments along existing roads (including extensions de velopments 
along ORR) c) scattered yet connected high end large scale residential complexes and d) 
erstwhile gramathans which are short of infrastructure facilities. It therefore becomes 
imperative for RMP2031 to guide planned urban development and promo tion of economic 
growth within the planning district and upgrade/ provide for the infrastructure.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
25-5 
2. RMP2031 proposes development of various economic nodes/ special deve lopment zones 
across BMA and PD Varthur - Gunjur is one among these to be developed as nodes/ zones. 
The guiding principles for developing PD as Special Development Zone is as following : 
a. Promotion of Economic Growth on Work – Live – Play Concept 
b. Development of Grid Pattern Circulation System allowing higher FAR consumpti on 
while integrating existing road network  
c. Promotion of Transit Oriented Development around Metro/ Mono Rail Stations  
d. Upgradation/ Provision of Physical Infrastructure within erstwhile gramathans (urban 
villages) 
e. Protection and Conservation of Lake System 
f. Planned Open & Open Spaces 
3. The RMP2031 proposes a Special Development Zone in this PD that   be governed by special 
regulations as stipulated in Zoning Regulations.  
4. The Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use Distribution for the PD are depicted in 
Figure 25-2  and Table 25- 2 respectively. The proposed land use has been designed to 
promote the economic activities along PRR, and major roads while residential use zone wou ld 
promote work live play concept. Park & open spaces have been distributed across the 
planning district and are mostly located around lakes.  
Figure 25-2: PD 24 Proposed Land Use Map 
 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
25-6 
Table 25-2: PD 24 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 1095.49 48.93 
Commercial 24.50 1.09 
Industrial   0.00 
Public & Semi Public 162.46 7.26 
Unclassified   0.00 
Public Utility 11.38 0.51 
Parks / Open Spaces 162.48 7.26 
Transport & Communication 215.91 9.64 
Forest   0.00 
Streams 10.56 0.47 
Water Bodies 260.43 11.63 
NGT Buffer 295.59 13.20 
Total Developable Area 2238.80 100.00 
Agriculture 631.39 - 
Total PD Area 2870.19 - 
 
Traffic and Transportation 
5. The Proposed Northern Peripheral Ring Road, Proposed Inner Peripheral Ring Road, Varthu r 
Main Road/ Old Airport Road, SH35 and Sarjapura Road along with existing Pan athur Road, 
Balagere Road, Gunjuru Palya Road, Railway line, development permissions grante d by BDA 
and earlier proposals of RMP 2015 has formed basis for new circulation network within the 
planning district. The proposed network is of gird pattern nature.  
6. It is proposed that all master plan roads within Planning District be develo ped as per the 
proposed cross section for respective widths, as to ensure that footpaths and cycle tracks ar e 
developed during the road development. This will help improve the accessibi lity within the 
planning district as this will facilitate movement of non-motorised transport.  
7. RMP2031 proposed city level public transport infrastructure like CRS, Metro and Mono Rail 
are running along roads within the Planning District. 
a. CRS: It is proposed that Bellandur Railway Stations is developed to cater t o 
passengers using CRS.  
b. Metro PRR Link: It is proposed to develop metro link along proposed  PRR at city level. 
However a stretch wherein SH35 and PRR runs parallel (from Kannamangala Village 
in PD 23 till Gunjur Kere), the Metro is proposed to take SH35 r oute. Accordingly, it is 
proposed to develop metro stations at a) Varthur Kodi (interchange with Mono Rai l), 
b) Varthur (near PU Collage), c) Varthur Police Station, d) near Chrysalis High School, 
e) Intersection of proposed 45m wide road and SH35 (Gunjur), and f) Intersectio n of  
PRR and SH35 (near Gunjur Kere).  
c. Mono Rail/ LRT/ BRTS on Old Airport Road: The proposed Mono Rail / LRT/ BRTS from 
Trinity Metro Station to Varthur Kodi touches the PD on northern side. Within PD, a  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
25-7 
station is proposed to be developed at Kundalahalli Gate Station (which is an 
interchange with Inner PRR Mono Rail/LRT/ BRTS Link).   
d. Mono Rail /LRTS/BRTS Inner PRR: The proposed Mono Rail / LRT/ BRTS around Inner 
Peripheral Ring Road passes through the PD. It is proposed to develop stati ons at a) 
Balagere b) Intersection of Proposed 45 Mt Road (Gunjur Palya), c) Intersection of 
Proposed Master Plan Roads (near Bhoganahalli Kere), and d) Intersection with 
Gunjur Road (after Carmelaram Mount Carmel Church then leading to Sarajapura 
Road.   
e. BMTC Bus Stations:In addition to existing Gunjur Depot, it is proposed to develop 3 
additional Bus Stations/ Terminal – a) a long PRR (Surhaunse), b) adjoining Balagere 
Road) and c) along 45mt wide road.  
8. Intermodal Interchange Stations are proposed to be developed at a) Kundalahalli Gate 
Junction and Varthur Kodi . 
9. The Transit Oriented Development Zone is proposed to be applicable around all met ro/ 
Mono Rail stations/ terminals/ interchanges within the planning district.  
10. New Link/Widening of Certain Roads/ Development of Flyover Overs/ Railway under Bridge: 
The RMP2031 proposes upgration/ widening of certain roads and development of Flyovers/ 
Railway under Bridge/ pass, etc to be taken up within the planning district. The RMP20 31 
recommends that design of flyovers/ bridges  be done considering propose d Mono Rail 
system.  
a) 45 m wide road connecting ORR to SH35: A 45m wide road is proposed  to be developed 
using existing alignment of New Horizon Collage Road and then Greenfield straight 
alignment to SH 35 from the junction of New Horizon Collage road and Dodda Kannelli – 
Kadu Beesanahalli Road crossing railway line. This road would is part of larger city  wide 
network formation and is strategically placed between old airport road/ varthur ro ad and 
Sarjapura Road. It is proposed that this 45m wide road is extended till BMR level Satelli te 
Town Ring Road.  
b) Development of existing roads as per RMP2031 proposal: The RMP2031 pro poses that all 
existing roads like Old Airport Road/ Varthur Road, SH35, Balagere Road, Doddakannell i – 
Kadubeesanahalli Road, Panathur Road/ Gunjur Palya Road/ Gunjur-Mugalur Road, 
Muthasandra Main Road, Halasahalli Cross Road, Munnekollal Main Road, Bhoganahall i 
Road are developed as per proposed Right of Ways and are proposed road cross-sections.  
c) Widening of Railway Underpass at Panathur: The RMP2031 proposes that the present 
railway underpass at Panathur  be widened to four lanes to all smoother vehicular traffic 
movement.  
d) Clover Leaf Interchange Intersection of Proposed 45M wide road and PRR: The RMP20 31 
proposes that junction of proposed 45 Mt wide road and proposed PRR  be a clover leaf 
interchange and no permission for development  be granted within 250m from  centre 
line of both the roads. 
e) Geometric Improvement of SH35 at Varthur Kere Bund: The RMP2031 proposed that, 
while developing SH35 as per proposed RoW, geometric improvement of SH35 (wh ich is 
also the bund for Varthur Kere), is taken up to smoothen the traffic flow.  
11. The RMP2031 has identified 15 junctions for geometric improvements for  better and 
smoother traffic flows and to be taken up on priority, and particularly in Greenfield areas.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
25-8 
Protection of Lakes and Drainage 
12. Majority of lakes within the PD have retained their characteristics despite new abutting 
developments. In order to protect and conserve lakes and streams as well as avoid floodin g in 
future as surface runoff increases due to urbanisation, the RMP2031 proposes that all lake s 
and streams be demarcated on ground within two years from notification of RMP2031 and 
lake development plan  be prepared for all the lakes within the PD.  
13. As mentioned earlier, all these lakes are within PD fall within Koramangala Challaghatta 
watershed, and drain into Varthur kere. The natural drainage system has been classified as 
following: 
a. Streams Between Bellanduru Kere and Varthur Kere and downstream of Varthru kere 
have been classified as Primary   
b. Streams downstream of Gunjur Kere and Chikka Bellanduru Kere and leading to 
Varthur Kere have been classified as Secondary Streams 
c. Streams upstream of Gunjur Kere and Chikka Bellanduru Kere have been classified as 
Tertiary.  
14. RMP2031 proposes to retain the valley portion between Railway Line an d Varthur Kere and 
downstream of Varthur Kere (till PRR/ BMA Boundary) as park and open space, thereby  
restricting developments in the valley area.  
Upgradation of Urban Villages 
15. The RMP2031 proposes that upgration of erstwhile gramathans like Varthur, Balagere, 
Panathur, Gunjur, Chikka Bellandur, Gunjur Palya, Surhaunse and Valepura is undertaken in 
to provide necessary infrastructure and facilities.  
Social and Physical Infrastructure Provisions 
16. To meet the future requirements, the RMP2031 proposes development of 1 no. of Fire 
Station, 1 no of 220kv Sub-station, 5 DWCCs, 1 OWCCs, and 1 Bio – Methanation Unit for 
solid waste management within the planning district.   
17. Further, the RMP2031 proposes that 1 graveyard  be developed within the earmarked open 
spaces at appropriate location.  
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD 24: Varthur – Gunjur 
1. Road Development Plan 
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Category - 1 
Roads (as listed in Annexure) and other roads in phased manner.   
b. Widening/ Upgradation of Certain Roads: 
i. Widening of Railway Underpass on Panathur Road 
ii. Development of Clover Leaf Interchange Intersection of Proposed 45m wide Road 
and PRR 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
25-9 
iii. Development of Existing Village Roads as per proposed Right of Way 
 Old Airport Road/ Varthur Road,  
 SH35,  
 Balagere Road,  
 Doddakannelli – Kadubeesanahalli Road,  
 Panathur Road/ Gunjur Palya Road/ Gunjur-Mugalur Road,  
 Muthasandra Road,  
 Halasahalli Cross Road,  
 Munnekollal Main Road,  
 Bhoganahalli Road  
c. Junction Improvement Programme: 
 Kundalahalli Gate 
 Varthur Kodi  
 Varthur Junction (Intersection of SH35 and Muthasandra Road) 
 Intersection of SH35 and Balagere Road (near Varthur Police Station) 
 Varthur Police Station Junction (Intersection of SH35 and Halasahalli Main 
Road 
 Gunjur Junction Intersection of SH35 and Gunjur-Mugalur Road  
 Intersection of SH35 and Gunjur – Doddakennelli Road 
 Kachamaranhalli Cross Gate Junction  
 Chikka Bellandur 
 Intersection of Panathur Road and Balagere – Gunjurpalya Road 
 Intersection of Panathur Road and Bhoganahalli Road 
 Intersection of Panathur Road and Doddakannelli-Kadubeesanahalli Road 
 Intersection of Harohalli Road and Muthasandra Road 
 Intersection of Velapura Road and Muthasandra Road 
 Intersection of Gunjurpalya Road and Balagere-Gunjur Road 
2. Development of Public Transport System:  
a. Metro - Peripheral Ring Road  
b. Mono Rail /LRT/BRTS: Trinity to Varthur Kodi 
c. Mono Rail /LRT/BRTS: Inner Peripheral Ring Road  
d. BMTC Bus Station: 03 Locations  
3. Development of Multimodal Interchange Stations  
a. Kundalahalli Gate Junction and  
b. Varthur Kodi   
4. Development of Parks and Open Spaces:  
a. Valley Portion between Railway Line and Varthur Kere 
b. Valley Portion downstream of Varthur Kere 
c. Other Park & Open Spaces as earmarked in PLU 
5. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes and Streams:  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
25-10 
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Preparation of Lakes & Streams Rejuvenation Plan : 
a. RMP2031 Streams Rejuvenation Plan 
b. Varthur Kere Rejuvenation Plan  
c. Gunjuru Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
d. Chikkabellanduru Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
e. Panathur Kere Lake Rejuvenation Plan,  
f. Gunjurpalya Kere Lake Rejuvenation Plan,  
g. Bhoganahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
h. Kachamaranahalli kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
i. One unnamed Kere in Panathur  
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Surrounding Area development plan to be prepared to upgrade the drainage and 
sewage infrastructure to stop flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as 
dumping of SWM.  
6. Upgradation of Urban Villages:  
7. Development of Social and Physical Infrastructure/ Facilities: 
a) Fire Station:    01 Nos. 
b) Crematorium:     01 Nos. 
c) Graveyard:    01 Nos. 
d) 220kV Sub-Station:    01 Nos. 
e) SWM Dry Waste Collection Centre:   05 Nos. 
f) SWM Organic Waste Collection Centre:  01 Nos. 
g) SWM Bio-Methanation Unit:   01 Nos. 
h) GLSR/ISP/STP:    As per BWSSB plan for 110 Villages 
 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
26-1 
26. PD 25: HALANAYAKANAHALLI – KODATHI 
SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT ZONE 
 
A. EXISITING STATUS 
1. Planning District 25 comprises of eight villages falling under two Gram Panchayats, namely 
Halanayikanahalli, Chikkanayikanahalli, Hadoshiddapura, Chikkakannelli, (all falling under   
Halanayakanahalli Gram Panchayat), Soolakunte, Kodathi, Mulluru and Kachamaranahalli (all 
falling under Kodathi Gram Panchayat).  
2. The Sarjapura Road, State Highway 35, Chikkanayakanahalli Road, Kodathi – Huskuru Road, 
Kodathi – Dommasandra Road, Gunjur – Kodathi Road define the present circulation pattern 
within PD. Bengaluru – Hosur Railway Line runs north south through the PD. There is one 
Kodathi Bus depot is located within the PD.  
3. GƌaŵathaŶa͛s ;ǀillage settleŵeŶtsͿ aƌe the ŵaiŶ ƌesideŶtial aƌeas, ǁhile ƌesideŶtial laǇouts 
and High rise apartment are present towards the western side (adjoining BBMP) and 
sĐatteƌed as ǁell. Majoƌ GƌaŵathaŶa͛s aƌe HalaŶaǇakaŶahalli, Hodisiddapuƌa, Kodathi aŶd  
Sulikunte. Wipro IT SEZ is being developed within PD and commercial establi shments are 
seen along Sarjapura road.  
4. As per Census 2011, the PD had 15614 people, which is an increase by 24 0% from 2001 
Census (6534). The workforce participation is 43.6 % of the total population. There ar e 3837 
house- holds in this PD, with average household size 4.1 which is slightl y higher in 
comparison to that of BMA (4.01). The Average Gross density is 7.83pph.  
Population (2011 Census): 15,614 
Area of PD: 1999.70 ha 
Gross Density (2011 Census): 08 pph 
Villages in PD: 8 
Gram Panchayats: Halanayakanahalli & 
Kodathi  
Halanayakanahalli – Kodathi Planning 
District (PD No.11) is located outside 
BBMP but abutting to BBMP boundary 
with Sarjapura Road cutting through its 
centre. It is witnessing urban expansion 
along Sarjapura Road, Huskuru –Kodathi 
Road and areas abutting to BBMP 
boundary. It is being seen as next 
important IT/ ITES/ Business Office 
destination for being located close to 
electronic city (adjoining PD 27).  
RMP2031 proposes to develop Special 
Develpoment Zone promoting high 
density planned employment centres and 
residential developments.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
26-2 
5. The PD is predominantly Agriculture with 66% of total PD area being under ag riculture use. 
Residential land use accounts for 7% total PD area with majority of residential areas being 
located close to BBMP boundary, alon g Saƌjapuƌa ‘oad aŶd GƌaŵathaŶa͛s. The ǀast opeŶ 
spaces provide for opportunity to have planned and high density development . Figure 26-1  
and Table 25-1  presents the existing land use map 2015 and existing land use area statement  
for Planning District respectively.  
Figure 26-1: PD 25 Existing Land Use Map 
 
Table 26-1: PD 25 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 146.78 7.34 
Commercial 9.22 0.46 
Industrial 14.36 0.72 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 98.26 4.91 
Pubic & Semi Public - Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 0.68 0.03 
Parks & Open Spaces 15.47 0.77 
Transport Communication 55.41 2.77 
Vacant 274.63 13.73 
Agriculture 1310.05 65.51 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 1.42 0.07 
Water Bodies 73.41 3.67 
Total 1999.69 100.00 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
26-3 
6.  As this PD is on the outskirts of BMA, very less developments on social infrastructure h as 
been observed. There are 19 schools in this PD and some of the major schools ar e Delhi 
Public School, Sri Sri Ravishankar vidya Mandir and Harvest International Scho ol. There are 
Primary healthcare centres, but there is a lack of any major healthcare facility, and p resently 
several areas in this PD do not have easy access to healthcare facilities within 5kms. There is 
a need of hospitals and other social infrastructure.  
7. Kodathi kere, Halanayakanahalli Lake, Hadosiddapura Lake, Malluru Kere, Sulikunte Kere, are 
the five main lakes fully within PD and have retained their characteristics. While 
Kachamaranahalli kere, Gunjuru Kere, Chikkabellanduru Kere, and Avalahalli Kere are partly 
falling within PD. In addition there are 5 unnamed lakes, one in Halanayakanahal li (with 
dense plantation), two in Kodathi (both breached) and two in Sulikunte villages (not  
breached). All these lakes are within Koramangala Challaghatta watershed, and except for 
Halanayakanahalli lake drain into Varthur kere. Halanayakanahalli kere drain into Bellanduru 
Kere. The railway line broadly defines the drainage pattern.  
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT ZONE WITH PLANNED HIGH DENSITY 
GROWTH AND ENABLING ECONOMIC GROWTH, INTEGRATION OF CITY CIRCULATION 
NETWORK, AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION. 
PROPOSALS 
11. PD is witnessing transforming rapidly into urban landscape and developments are fol lowing 
radial as well as scattered development pattern. It becomes imperative that RMP2031 d irects 
for planned urban development and promotion of economic growth along pro posed major 
Ring and Radials.  
12. RMP2031 proposes development of various economic nodes/ special devel opment zones 
across BMA and PD Halanayanakahalli – Kodathi is one of these nodes/ zones proposed to be 
development. The guiding principles for developing PD as Special Develo pment Zone is as 
following: 
a. Promotion of Economic Growth along Rings/ Radials  
b. Development of Grid Pattern Circulation System allowing higher FAR consumption  
c. Promotion of Transit Oriented Development around Metro/ Mono Rail Stations  
d. Protection and Conservation of Lake System 
e. Planned Open & Open Spaces 
13. The Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use Distribution for the PD are depicted in 
Figure 26-2 and Table 26-2 respectively. The proposed land use has been designed to 
promote the economic activities along PRR, and major roads while residential use zone wou ld 
promote work live play concept. Park & open spaces have been distributed across the 
planning district and are mostly located around lakes.  
 
 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
26-4 
Figure 26-2: PD 25 Proposed Land Use Map 
 
Table 26-2: PD 25 Proposed Land Use Area Statement  
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 837.61 47.79 
Commercial 23.72 1.35 
Industrial 85.17 4.86 
Public & Semi Public 150.69 8.60 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 1.62 0.09 
Parks / Open Spaces 101.62 5.80 
Transport & Communication 205.06 11.70 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 0.00 0.00 
Water Bodies 69.34 3.96 
NGT Buffer 277.69 15.85 
Total Developable Area 1752.51 100.00 
Agriculture 247.17 - 
Total PD Area 1999.69 - 
Traffic and Transportation 
14. The Proposed Northern Peripheral Ring Road, Proposed Inner Peripheral Ring Road and 
Sarjapura Road along with existing Chikkanayakanahalli Road, Kodathi – Huskuru, Gattihalli 
Road and Gunjuru – Kodathi, and lakes, has formed basis for new circulation network within 
the planning district.  

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
26-5 
15. It is proposed that all master plan roads within Planning District be develo ped as per the 
proposed cross section for respective widths, as to ensure that footpaths and cycle tracks ar e 
developed during the road development. This shall help improve the accessibility within the 
planning district as this will facilitate movement of non-motorised transport.  
16. RMP2031 proposed city level public transport infrastructure like CRS, Metro and Mono Rail 
are running along roads within the Planning District. 
a. Metro PRR Link: It is proposed to develop metro link along propo sed PRR at city level. 
It is proposed to develop metro stations at a) Intersection of  PRR and SH35 ( near 
Gunjur Kere), b) Interchange with BMTC (in Kachamaranahalli Village) at the centre of 
proposed major employment centre, and c) Intersection of PRR with Sarjapura Road 
(interchange with Mono Rail 5).  
b. Mono Rail / LRT/ BRTS on Sarjapura Road: It is proposed to develop a Mono Rai l link 
along the Sarjapura Road from Ibbalur Metro Station till Tchuddadenahalli on 
Sarjapura Main Road near BMA boundary. The proposed Mono Rail link passes 
through this Special Development Zone providing much needed connectivity with 
Metro ORR as well as Metro PRR. The first station within PD is an Interchange with  
Mono Rail along Inner Peripheral Ring Road and followed by stations along Sarjapura 
road at a) Wipro SEZ, b) Kodathi Gate, c) Gouthamagara, d) Interchange with Metro 
at PRR, e) Muthanallur Cross, f) Dommasandra Circle, and g) the terminal station a t 
Tchuddadenahalli.  
c. Mono Rail / LRT/ BRTS around Inner Peripheral Ring Road passes through the P D and 
it is proposed to develop stations at a) Kadugodi (interchange with CRS, BMTC 
Kadugodi Bus Station & Whitefield Metro), b) Hope Farm, c) Whitefield Police 
Station, d) Whitefield, d) Hagadur, and e) Varthur Kodi then leading to Varthur 
Village.  
17. Intermodal Interchange Stations are proposed to be developed at 2 locations – a) 
Kachamaranahalli Village , and b) Intersection with Sarjapura Road at Sulikunte.  
18. The Transit Oriented Development Zone is proposed to be applicable around all met ro/ 
Mono Rail stations/ terminals/ interchanges within the planning district.  
19. Widening of Certain Roads/ Development of Flyover Overs/ Railway under Bridg e: The 
RMP2031 proposes upgration/ widening of certain roads and development of Flyovers/ 
Railway under Bridge, etc, to be taken up within the planning district. The RMP2 031 
recommends that design of flyovers/ bridges  be done considering propose d Mono Rail 
system.  
a) Widening of Railway Bridge: The RMP2031 proposes that the 
present railway bridge  be widened from four lanes to six lanes in 
future.  
b) Clover Leaf Interchange Intersection of Sarjapura Road and PRR: 
The RMP2031 proposes that junction of Sarjapura Road and 
proposed PRR  be a clover leaf interchange. Further, at this location 
an intermodal interchange station is proposed to be developed 
between Metro PRR and Mono Rail Sarjapura Road. Both the design 
of junction and intermodal interchange  be done together.  

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
26-6 
c) Flyover at Dommasandra Circle: The RMP2031 proposes that a six lane flyover  be 
constructed (Sarjapura Road Direction) at Dommasandra Circle. This junction is also 
proposed for geometric improvement. Hence the development of flyover and juncti on 
improvement  be done together so as to provide seamless and uninterrupted vehicular 
movement and pedestrian crossing facilities.  
d) Widening of existing village roads: The RMP2031 proposes that all existing are developed  
as proposed by RMP 2031 and as per proposed road cross-sections.  
20. The RMP2031 has identified several junctions for geometric improvements for better and 
smoother traffic flows and to be taken up on priority, and particularly in Greenfield areas.  
21. The RMP2031 has identified several junctions for geometric improvements for b etter and 
smoother traffic flows and to be taken up on priority, and particularly in Greenfield areas.  
22. Majority of lakes within the PD have retained their characteristics despite developments a re 
coming abutting them. In order to protect and conserve lakes and streams as well  as avoi d 
flooding in future as surface runoff increases due to urbanisation, the RMP2031 propose s 
that all lakes and streams be demarcated on ground within two years from notifica tion of 
RMP2031 by Gram Panchayats and lake development plan  be prepared for all the lakes 
within the PD.  
23. As mentioned earlier, all these lakes are within PD fall within Koramangala Challaghatta 
watershed, and drain into Varthur kere except for Halanayakanahalli kere. The 
Halanayakanahalli kere drain into Bellanduru Kere. This is probably due the railway  line, 
which divides the PD and also defines the drainage pattern. 
24. The classification natural drainage system defined, all streams within the planning districts 
have been classified as Tertiary.  
25. The RMP2031 proposes that upgration of  all gramthans of the villages is  undertaken in time 
bound manner to provide necessary infrastructure and facilities.  
26. To meet the future requirements, the RMP2031 proposes development of 1 no. of Fire 
Station, 1 no of 220kv Sub-station, 10 DWCCs, 2 OWCCs, and 1 Bio – Methanation Unit for 
solid waste management within the planning district.   
27. Further, the RMP2031 proposes that 1 crematorium and 1 graveyard be developed within the 
earmarked open spaces at appropriate location.  
28. The RMP2031 proposes that a detailed water supply and sewage network plan for ar eas 
outside BBMP (though outside its jurisdiction) but within Conurbation be p repared. This will 
help determine the locations for WTP, GLSR and OHTs.  
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD 25: Halanayakanahalli – Kodathi 
1. Road Development Plan 
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Category - 1 
Roads (as listed in Annexure) and other roads in phased manner.   
b. Widening/ Upgradation of Certain Roads: 
iv. Widening of Railway Bridge on Sarjapura Road  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
26-7 
v. Development of Clover Leaf Interchange Intersection of SH35 and PRR 
vi. Development of Flyover at Dommasandra Circle 
vii. Upgradation  Of Existing Village Road 
 Chikkanayakanahalli Road,  
 Kodathi – Huskuru,  
 Gattihalli Road,  
 Gunjuru – Kodathi,  
 Dommasandra Huskuru Road,  
 Sulikunte-Chokkasandra Road,  
 Kodathi – Sulikunte Road  
 Dommasandra – Chandapura Road  
c. Junction Improvement Programme: 
 Carmelram Gate 
 Ambedkar Nagar Junction (intersection of Sarjapura Road and Road leading 
to Mulluru.  
 Gouthamagara Junction (intersection of Sarjapura Road and Sulikunte Road).  
 Muthanallur Cross  (Intersection of Sarjapura Road and Dommasandra – 
Chandapura Road 
 Intersection of Hukuru – Dommasandra Road and Kodathi – Huskuru Road 
 Intersection of Sulikunte – Chokkasandra Road and Kodathi – Sulikunte Road 
2. Development of Public Transport System:  
a. Metro - Peripheral Ring Road  
b. Mono Rail /LRT/BRTS: Ibbalur to Tchuddadenahalli 
c. Mono Rail /LRT/BRTS: Inner Peripheral Ring Road  
d. BMTC Bus Station: 03 Locations  
e. BMTC Depot: 01 location along PRR 
3. Development of Multimodal Interchange Stations  
a. Kachamaranahalli Village and  
b. Intersection of PRR and Sarjapura Road at Sulikunte.  
4. Development of Logistic Hub/ Truck Terminal 
a. At the intersection of PRR and Sarjapura Road as indicated in PLU Map 
 
5. Development of Parks and Open Spaces: as earmarked in PLU 
6. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes and Streams:  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Preparation of Lakes & Streams Rejuvenation Plan : 
a. RMP2031 Streams Rejuvenation Plan 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
26-8 
b. Kodathi Kere Rejuvenation Plan  
c. Halanayakanahalli Lake Rejuvenation Plan,  
d. Hadosiddapura Lake Rejuvenation Plan,  
e. Malluru Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
f. Sulikunte Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
g. Kachamaranahalli kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
h. Gunjuru Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
i. Chikkabellanduru Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
j. Avalahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
k. Five Unnamed Dried lakes Rejuvenation Plan  
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Surrounding Area development plan to be prepared to upgrade the drainage and 
sewage infrastructure to stop flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as 
dumping of SWM.  
7. Upgradation of Urban Villages 
8. Development of Social and Physical Infrastructure/ Facilities: 
a) Fire Station:    01 Nos. 
b) Crematorium:     01 Nos. 
c) Graveyard:    01 Nos. 
d) 220kV Sub-Station:    01 Nos. 
e) SWM Dry Waste Collection Centre:   10 Nos. 
f) SWM Organic Waste Collection Centre:  02 Nos. 
g) SWM Bio-Methanation Unit:   01 Nos. 
h) WTP:    as required and as per details  
9. Preparation of Water Supply and Sewage Network Plan for PD 25 (Gram Panch ayath 
Halanayakanahalli and Kodathi) 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
27-1 
27. PD 26: Dommasandra Special Development Zone  
 
1. Planning District comprises of nine villages falling 
under three different Gram Panchayats, namely Dommasandra GP, Yamare GP and Neriga 
GP. The nine Villages are a) Dommasandra (Dommasandra GP),  Thigalachavadadenahalli 
(Yamare GP), Heggondahalli, Chikkavaderapura, , Ramanayikanahalli, Halasahalli 
Thippasandra, Nekkundi Dommasandra, Katheriguppe and Chikkanekkundi (all in Neriga GP).  
2. The Sarjapura Road, State Highway 35, Dommasandra – Channasandra Road, Huskuru – 
Dommosandra Road, Gunjur – Magalur Road, Halasahalli Cross Road/ Nekkundi 
Dommasandra Road defines the present circulation pattern within PD.  
3. GƌaŵathaŶa͛s ;ǀillage settleŵeŶt s) are the main residential areas, while residential layouts 
and High rise apartment are present along Sarjarapura Road. Dommasandra is the largest  
ǀillage ǁith ŵajoƌitǇ of PD͛s populatioŶ ƌesidiŶg iŶ DoŵŵasaŶdƌa.   
A. Existing Status 
Demography 
4. As per Census, in 2011 PD had 21300 residents, which has increased by 53.7% from  the year 
2001 (13857). The workforce participation is 42% (with 8961 resident workers) of the PD 
population. There are 5374 households with average household size 4.0 which is very similar 
to the average household size in BMA (4.01). The Average Gross density is 11 PPH.  
5. The PD is predominantly Agriculture with 77% of total PD area being under ag riculture use. 
Residential land use accounts for 6% total PD area with majority of residential areas being 
located along Sarjapura Road and Dommosandra village. The vast open spaces provide for 
opportunity to have planned and high density development. Figure 27-1 and Table 27-1 
Population (2011 Census): 21300 
Area of PD: 1938.9 Ha 
Gross Density (2011 Census): 11 PPH 
Villages in PD: 9 
Gram Panchayats: Dommasandra, 
Yamare & Neriga  
 
Dommasandra Planning District (PD 
No.26) is located outside BBMP on the 
periphery and on south eastern side of 
BMA. Sarjapura Road passes through its 
southern side. It is witnessing urban 
expansion along Sarjapura Road and SH 
35 in a predominantly agricultural 
landscape.  
RMP2031 proposes growth along the 
Sarjapura road while retaining the 
agriculture landscape rest of the PD.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
27-2 
present the existing land use map 2015 and existing land use area statement for Pl anning 
District 26 respectively.  
6. As this PD is on the outskirts of BMA, very less developments on social infras tructure has 
been observed, however, there are 17 schools in this PD including some internatio nal schools 
and one private playground. PD is devoid of any major healthcare faci lities. Two cricket 
grounds are present in Dommasandra Village.  
 
Figure 27-1: PD 26 Existing Land Use Map 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
27-3 
Table 27-1: PD 26 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 98.26 5.07 
Commercial 11.49 0.59 
Industrial 16.66 0.86 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 65.94 3.40 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 0.03 0.00 
Parks & Open Spaces 6.08 0.31 
Transport Communication 30.96 1.60 
Vacant 143.63 7.41 
Agriculture 1507.92 77.77 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 0.41 0.02 
Water Bodies 57.53 2.97 
Total 1938.91 100.00 
 
7. There are 12 lakes either partly or fully falling within the Planning District. Chikkanekkundi 
and Ramanayakanahalli village both have two lakes. Chikkanekkundi has Muthasandra Ker e 
and Chikkanekkundi Kere, whereas Ramanayakanahalli has Ramanyakanahalli Kere and 
unnamed lake. Similarly Thigalachavadadenahalli village has two lakes namely 
Thigalachavadadenahalli kere and Chambenahalli kere (parly falling in Anekal Planni ng 
Authority. Halasahalli lake, Dommasandra lake, Heggondahalli lake, Chikkavaderapura l ake, 
Nekkundi Dommasandra kere and Kachamaranahalli kere (part) are other lakes falling within  
PD. Most of the lakes are witnessing growth of vegetation within the lake bed and also 
farming. Nekkundi Dommasandra kere has been breached due to plotted development.  
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT ZONE WITH PLANNED HIGH DENSITY 
GROWTH ALONG RADIAL ROAD, VILLAGE DEVELOPMENT AND ENVIRONMENTAL 
PROTECTION. 
PROPOSALS 
1. PD is witnessing Radial growth and is an extension to PD 25 which has been designated as 
Special Development zone promoting growth along radial road i.e. Sarjapura Road . The 
RMP2031 therefore proposes Radial Growth along the Sarjapura Road while retaining rest 
the area under Planning Zone C (preservation). However, RMP2031 proposes develo pment of 
various economic nodes/ special development zones across BMA and PD Hala nayanakahalli – 
Kodathi (adjoining PD) and PD Dommasandra are among these nodes/ zones. Hen ce, a band 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
27-4 
along the Sarjapura road has been brought under development framework and is d esignated 
as Special Development Zone.  
2. The guiding principles for developing Dommasandra PD as Special Development  Zone as well 
as preserving its agriculture landscape are as following: 
a. Promotion of Radial Growth along Sarjapura Road 
b. Protection and Conservation of Lake System 
c. Planned Open & Open Spaces 
d. Preservation of Agriculture Zone 
3. The proposed land use has been designed to promote the economic activities along Sarjapura 
Road while residential use zone would promote work live play concept. In o rder to support 
Sarjapura Road two parallel roads from PRR are proposed till BMA Boundary. Sarajapura  
Road, PRR and SH35 have formed the basis for development of Grid Pattern Road Network 
with the planning district. Park & open spaces have been distributed across the pl anning 
district and are mostly located around lakes. The Proposed Land Use Map and Pro posed Land 
Use Distribution for the PD are depicted in Figure 27-2 and Table 27- 2 respectively. 
Figure 27-2: PD 26 Proposed Land Use Map  
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
27-5 
Table 27-2: PD 26 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 842.62 48.99 
Commercial 57.42 3.34 
Industrial 166.63 9.69 
Public & Semi Public 60.02 3.49 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 1.90 0.11 
Parks / open spaces 46.29 2.69 
Transport & Communication 233.12 13.55 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 2.32 0.13 
Water Bodies 110.80 6.44 
NGT Buffer 198.89 11.56 
Total Developable Area 1719.99 100.00 
Agriculture 2193.70 - 
Total PD Area 3913.70 - 
 
4. The RMP2031 proposes to guide the village development and improved conn ectivity such 
that there is a wholesome approach to infrastructure upgradation and livability. The focus is 
on village development and hence it is proposed to prepare Village Devel opment Plan 
comprising of Infrastructure Development within Gramathana, development of Gramathana 
peripheral road, development of village roads (to improve accessibility), lake rejuvenation 
and lake area development, development of Bus Stations, development of SWM facili ties, 
etc.  
5. The Sarjapura Road, SH35, Dommasandra –Chandapura Road, Gunjur – Mugalur Road, and 
Halasahalli Cross Road/ Nekkundi Dommasandra Road has formed basis for n ew circulation 
network within the planning district, which is a grid patterned road network within 
conurbation limits while outside conurbation in agriculture zone existing vi llage road have 
been retained. Further, in agriculture zone, around Gramathans, it is proposed to  develop a 
Gramathana Periphery Road.  
6. It is proposed that all master plan roads (including roads connecting villages) within Planning 
District be developed as per the proposed cross section for respective widths, as to ensure  
that footpaths and cycle tracks are developed during the road development. This will help 
improve the accessibility within the planning district as this will facilitate movem ent of non-
motorised transport.  
7. RMP2031 proposed Mono Rail/ LRT/ BRTS along Sarjapura road is the main stay publ ic 
transport providing connectivity with rest of city level Public Transport Networ k . There are 
three stations within PD – namely a) Muthanallur Cross, b) Dommasandra Circle, and c) the 
terminal station at Tchuddadenahalli (with BMTC Bus Station). Multimodal Interchan ge 
Stations is proposed to be developed at Tchuddadenahalli.  
8. The Transit Oriented Development Zone is proposed to be applicable around all met ro/ 
Mono Rail stations/ terminals/ interchanges within the planning district.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
27-6 
9. To improve the public transport connectivity across Planning District, it is  proposed that 
BMTC bus stations are developed at Nekkundi Dommasandra, Kathriguppe and 
Dommasandra.  
10. Widening of Certain Roads/ Development of Flyover Overs: The RMP2031 proposes 
upgration/ widening of certain roads and development of Flyovers/ Railway un der Bridge, 
etc, to be taken up within the planning district. The RMP2031 recommends that design of 
flyovers/ bridges  be done considering proposed Mono Rail system.  
e) Flyover at Dommasandra Circle: The RMP2031 proposes that a six lane flyover  be 
constructed (Sarjapura Road Direction) at Dommasandra Circle.  
f) Widening of existing village roads: The RMP2031 proposes that all existing r oads are 
upgraded as proposed by RMP 2031 and are developed as per proposed road cross-
sections.  
8. The PD has four different watersheds, while Koramangala Challaghatta is well known and  has 
defined nomenclature, the other three have been named by RMP 2031 and are a) 
Chikkanekkundi – Muthsandra, b) Heggagondanahalli – Ittuguru and c) Dommasandra  - 
Yamare. It is important to note here that watershed analysis is limited to BMA only, and  for 
this reason three watersheds within a small area have been defined.  
9. Chikkavaderapura Kere, Heggondahalli Kere, and Kachamaranahalli Kere are part of 
Koramangala Challaghatta valley and drain into Varthur Kere. Ramanayikanahall, Halasah alli 
Kere, Nekkundi Dommasandra, Chikkanekkundi Kere and Muthsandra Kere all drain into 
primary stream leading from Varthur Kere and joining to Kelavarapelli Reservoir. Whereas 
Thigalachoudadenahalli Kere and Dommasandra Kere despite being in different watershed 
drain into Ittangur Kere outside BMA.  
10.  As mentioned earlier, Most of the lakes are witnessing growth of vegetation withi n the lake 
bed and also being used for farming, whereas Nekkundi Dommasandra kere has been 
breached due to plotted development. In order to protect and conserve lakes and stre ams as 
well as avoid flooding in future as surface runoff increases due to urbanisation with in the PD 
and adjoining PD, the RMP2031 proposes that all lakes and streams be demarcated  on 
ground within two years from notification of RMP2031 by Gram Panchayats and l ake 
development plan  be prepared for all the lakes within the PD. It is proposed that breached 
lakes/ tanks are redeveloped and rejuvenated as well by relocating the activities being 
performed within lake bed.  
11. As per the classification of natural drainage system within BMA, all the streams withi n the 
planning districts have been classified as Tertiary Streams.  
12. The RMP2031 proposes that upgƌatioŶ of GƌaŵthaŶ͛s of the ǀillages ǁithiŶ CoŶuƌďatioŶ is 
undertaken in time bound manner to provide necessary infrastructure and facilities.  
13. To meet the future requirements, the RMP2031 proposes development of 1 no. of Fire 
Station, 1 no of 220kv Sub-station, 8 DWCCs (3 within Conurbation Lim its and one each in 
GƌaŵathaŶa͛sͿ, aŶd ϭOWCCs, foƌ solid ǁaste ŵaŶageŵeŶt ǁithiŶ the plaŶŶiŶg distƌiĐt.  
14. RMP2031 proposes that 1 crematorium and 1 graveyard will be devel oped within the 
earmarked open spaces at appropriate location .  
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
27-7 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD 26: Dommasandra  
1. Road Development Plan 
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Category - 1 
Roads (as listed in Annexure) and other roads in phased manner.   
b. Development of Flyover at Dommasandra Circle 
c. Widening Of Existing Village Road 
 Dommasandra – Chandapura Road  
 Dommasandra Huskuru Road, 
 Gunjur – Mugalur Road,  
 Halasahalli Cross Road/ Nekkundi Dommasandra Road 
d. Junction Improvement Programme: 
 Dommasandra Junction 
 Muthanallur Cross  (Intersection of Sarjapura Road and Dommasandra – 
Chandapura Road 
 Intersection of Hukuru – Dommasandra Road and Kodathi – Huskuru Road 
2. Development of Public Transport System:  
a. Mono Rail /LRT/ BRTS 
b. BMTC Bus Station: 03 Locations  
3. Development of Intermodal Interchange Stations  
a. Tchuddadenahalli Interchange   
4. Development of Gramathana Periphery Roads and Village Roads: It is proposed to develop 
gramathana periphery roads for following gramathans (as indicated in PLU Map) 
5. Development of Parks and Open Spaces 
a. Development of Sports Complex 
b. Parks and Open Spaces as demarcated in PLU Map 
6. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes and Streams:  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Preparation of Lakes & Streams Rejuvenation Plan : 
a. RMP2031 Streams Rejuvenation Plan 
b. Dommasandra Kere Rejuvenation Plan  
c. Chikkavaderapura Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
d. Heggondahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
e. Kachamaranahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
f. Ramanayikanahall Rejuvenation Plan,  
g. Halasahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
h. Nekkundi Dommasandra Kere Rejuvenation Cum Resettlement Plan,  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
27-8 
i. Chikkanekkundi Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
j. Muthsandra Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
k. Thigalachoudadenahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
l. Two Unnamed Dried lakes Rejuvenation Plan  
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Surrounding Area development plan to be prepared to upgrade the drainage and 
sewage infrastructure to stop flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as 
dumping of SWM.  
7. Development of Social and Physical Infrastructure/ Facilities: 
a) Fire Station:    01 Nos. 
b) Crematorium:     01 Nos. 
c) Graveyard:    01 Nos. 
d) 220kV Sub-Station:    01 Nos. 
e) SWM Dry Waste Collection Centre:   08 Nos. 
f) SWM Organic Waste Collection Centre:  01 Nos. 
g) WTP, OHT, GLSR and STP   to be decided based on Water Supply & 
Sewage Network Plan 
h) Preparation of Water Supply and Sewage Network Plan for Conurbation Area 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
28-1 
28. PD 27: SINGASANDRA –HEBBAGODI –
KOMMASANDRA  
Population (2011 Census): 90831 
Area of PD: 3913.6 Ha 
Villages in PD: 21 
Gross Density: 23.2 pph 
 
This Planning District is located on the 
south eastern side of BMA, outside 
BBMP. Huskur temple is an important 
landmark in this PD. 
The RMP2031 proposes to retain the 
existing agricultural landuse prevailing 
in this planning district and develop 
part of the conurbation adjoining 
electronic city as a special development 
zone.  
 
 
 
1. This PD consists of 21 villages namely Gollahalli, Thirupalya (comes u nder Jigani Hobli), 
Hebbagodi, Gollahalli, Veerasandra (comes under Attibele Hobli), Chikkanagamangala,  
Gulamangala, Shingena Agrahara, Ghotamaranahalli, Madivala, Kaggalipura, Kommasandra, 
Hosahalli, Chokkasandra, Harohalli, Huskuru, Avalahalli, Ghuttihalli, Shrirampura, Ray asandra, 
Choodasandra (comes under Sarjapura Hobli).  
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography 
2. As per Census 2011, PD 27 has a populaion of 90831, which has increased rap idly by 189 % 
from the year 2001 (31329). The total resident workers in this PD are 54026, which makes up 
more than 59 % of the populaion in this PD. There are 24790 households in this PD, with 
average household size 3.66 which is less than the average household size in BMA (4.01). The 
Average Gross density is 23.2 pph and the residenial density is 327.6 pph. 
Industry and Commerce  
3. The predominant landuse is under agriculture. Veersandara Industrial Area, part of 
Bommasandara Industrial area and APMC (Agriculture Produce Market Commitee) fruit 
market come within this Planning District. Some brick kilns factories and small scal e 
industries under KSSIDC (Karnataka State Small Scale Industries Development Corporation) 
are also seen in this Planning District 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
28-2 
Existing Land Use  
4. The predominant land use in this planning district is agricultural landuse.  The ex isting 
landuse map and the land use area statement are presented below in Figure 28-1 and Table 
28-1 respectively.  
Figure 28-1: PD 27 Existing Land Use Map 
 
 
Table 28-1: PD 27 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 308.75 7.89 
Commercial 40.31 1.03 
Industrial 184.90 4.72 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 56.91 1.45 
Pubic & Semi Public - Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 0.93 0.02 
Parks & Open Spaces 9.96 0.25 
Transport Communication 122.13 3.12 
Vacant 773.90 19.77 
Agriculture 2234.43 57.09 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 4.52 0.12 
Water Bodies 176.96 4.52 
Total 3913.70 100.00 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
28-3 
Housing and Slums  
5. This planning district has grown very rapidly owing to economic growth in this area and the 
neighboring economic nodes like Electronic City. It is seen that there are several upcoming 
residential layouts in this PD 
Traffic and Transportation 
6. Huskur Road is the major arterial road passing through the PD, part of Hosur road (NH 7) and 
Chandapura-Dommasandara road comes under this planning district as well. Railway l ine is 
also passing through this Planning District. There is Chikkanagmangala bus depot in this PD 
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
7. This planning district has several schools (26 in number); there is a gap in tertiar y healthcare 
infrastructure in this PD. Present gaps are being met by the availability of good educational 
facilities and healthcare centres in the neighbouring PDs. Primary healthcare is being 
provided by the primary health centres in the villages within this PD. There is a gap  in water 
supply and sanitation facilities which needs to be met. There is one integrated waste 
processing unit (IWPU) in this P.D.  
Lakes & Drainage 
8. There are several lakes in this planning district like Sreerampura (Partly), Tirupalya (partly), 
Tirupalya Kere 2,Veerasandra, Hebbagodi Lake, Chikkanagamangala Lake, Gulimangala,  
Harohalli, Chokkasandra, Gatahalli, Huskur, Shingena Agrahara Kere , Gotemaranahalli Kere, 
Hosahalli Kere (Gandhi Nagara), Chokkasandra Kere, C. Harohalli Kere, Huskoor Kere. The 
natural heritage in the form of lakes needs to be preserved. 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: PRESERVATION OF AGRICULTURAL BELT, PLANNED DEVELOPMENT IN 
THE SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT ZONE, VILLAGE DEVELOPMENT 
PROPOSALS 
1. Most paƌt of this plaŶŶiŶg distƌiĐt falls uŶdeƌ the ͚ĐoŶsolidatioŶ zoŶe͛ of the ‘MP ϮϬ ϯϭ ǁheƌe 
it is proposed to provide appropriate infrastructure to support planned high er density 
development. The agricultural areas outside the conurbation are proposed to be retained in  
its natural state.  
2. The Proposed Land Use map and Land Use Area Statement is presented in Figure 28-2 and 
Table 28-2.  
3. Public Transport System planned at city level passes through this PD and they are  
a. Electronic City Metro (It is proposed that electronic city link is extended til l 
Chandapura) 
b. The RMP2031 proposes Metro along PRR. 
c. To improve the public transport facility it is proposed to develop a bus depot in PD 27 
4. A 30 m road is proposed by BMRDA for BMR circulation plan has been incor porated with 
certain amendments looking into the ground conditions. 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
28-4 
Figure 28-2: PD 27 Proposed Land Use Map  
 
Table 28-2: PD 27 Proposed Landuse Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential   Commercial   Industrial   Public & Semi Public   Unclassified   Public Utility   Parks / open spaces   Transport & Communication   Forest   Streams   Water Bodies   NGT Buffer   Total Developable Area   Agriculture 2193.70 - 
Total PD Area 3913.70 - 
 
5. The RMP2031 proposes development of the following roads: Hullimang ala Road, Singena 
Agrahara Road, Chandapura Dommasandra Road. The PRR is proposed across this planning  

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
28-5 
district.  The RMP2031 proposes appropriate road infrastructure to improve conn ectivity in 
the areas along the PRR that support economic activities.   
6. A PD level large Park is proposed to be developed for providing recreational facilities to 
residents. 
7. The RMP2031 proposes the protection and conservation of the lakes: Tirupalya Kere 2, 
Veerasandra, Hebbagodi Lake, Chikkanagamangala Lake, Gulimangala, Harohalli, 
Chokkasandra, Gatahalli, Huskur, Shingena Agrahara Kere , Gotemaranahalli Kere, Hosahalli 
Kere (Gandhi Nagara), Chokkasandra Kere, C. Harohalli Kere, Huskoor Kere. The natural  
heritage in the form of lakes needs to be preserved. 
8. Protection of streams:  The RMP2031 proposes that these streams  be kept free of all 
encumbrances, sludge, SWM and no sewage  be allowed to flow into the streams an d lakes.  
The important natural drains within the PD are classified as follows: 
a. Drainage downstream  of Doddathoguru lake 3 via Konappana Agrahara Lake 8, 
Rayasandra lake 1,  Ghattihalli lake 3 towards Huskuru Lake 6 reaching Shingena Agrahara 
lake 8 = Tertiary 
b. Drainage downstream  of  Chikkanagamangala lake via  Gottamaranahalli lake reaching 
Shingena Agrahara lake 8 = Tertiary 
9. To mitigate provide comfort to pedestrians and NMT facilities and improve street aesthetics, 
the RMP2031 proposes road side and avenue plantation for all master  plan roads and village 
roads as indicated in the proposed land use plan for the Planning District. 
10. The RMP2031 proposes development of fire station at Hebbagodi as required by th e 
Karnataka Fire and Emergency Services. The masterplan also proposes a 200 KV substation 
and 4 Dry Waste Collection Centers in PD 27. 
 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD 27 
1. Road Development Plan:  
a. Road development plan is to be prepared for all Master Plan roads.  
b. Junction improvement plan 
i. Singhena Agrahara cross 
ii. Huskur Gate 
iii. Intersection of Huskur road and Singena Agrahara  
c. Safe Pedestrian Crossings  
i. Huskur Gate  on Hosur Road 
d. BMR Regional Link 
2. Development of Transportation Infrastructure:  
a. Metro: Metro is proposed along the PRR in Phase 3.   
b. One Multi modal hub is proposed at Huskur Gate on the Hosur Main road. 
c. Bus depots are proposed at Huskur Village and at Huskur Gate on Hosur Road. 
3. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes  and Streams :  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
28-6 
b. Rejuvenation of Lakes & Streams : It is proposed that a detailed Lake and Strea m 
Rejuvenation Plan be prepared. The project identified therein  be taken up under 
Village Development Plan.  
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Area development plan be prepared. Such plan be in conformity to propos als of RMP 
2031.  
4. Physical and Social Infrastructure 
a. Dry Waste Collection Centre    4 Nos 
b. Fire Station       1 No. 
c. 220 Kv Substation     1 No. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
29-1 
29. PD 28: ELECTRONIC CITY – DODDATHOGURU 
Population (2011 Census): 51,092 
Area of PD: 2138.3 ha 
Villages in PD: 7 
Gross Density : 23.9 pph 
Electronic City – Doddathoguru 
Planning District is located at the 
southern quadrant of BMA, outside the 
BBMP jurisdiction, at the south side of 
the NICE corridor. The PD has seen high 
decadal growth rate owing to the 
Electronic City Phase that is located 
here and its accessibility to the NICE 
corridor. 
The RMP2031 proposes limited 
development activities, whilst rest of 
area is proposed to agriculture land 
use, owing to the existing pattern of 
development and activities. 
1. The Doddathoguru – Electronic City PD comprises of 7 villages, Hommadevanahalli, 
Doddanagamangala (part in BMICAPA), Doddathoguru (part in BMICAPA), Kon appana 
Agrahara (part in BMICAPA), Mylasandra, Bettadasanapura, and Vittasandra.  
2. The major landmarks in the area are the Electronic City Phase – I and Phase- II along the 
either side of the Hosur road at the east of the PD. Other land marks are Infosys campus, 
Crowne Plaza etc. 
3. Electronic City is a major work centre for BMA, hence has high density, while the village 
settlements and residential layouts in the Westen side of the Planning Distric t have relatively 
lower density. 
4. Hosur road, Electronic City Elevated Toll Expressway, Begur-Koppa road and Nee ladri road, 
Villasandra main road, CK Palya road, Wipro Avenue, Velankani road are the major roads in 
this Planning District. The NICE Ring road is accessible along the northern boundary of  the 
Planning District. 
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography 
5. As per Census 2011 the PD 28 has a population of 51,092, with a decadal g rowth rate of by 
129.89 % (2001-2011). The workforce participation rate is 54% of the populatio n. The Gross 
density is 23.9 pph, and the residential density is 190.01 pph. 
6. There are 14,068 households in this PD, with average household size 3.6 wh ich is less in 
comparison to that of BMA (4.01).  
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
29-2 
Industry and Commerce 
7. The important employment nodes in the PD are the Wipro SEZ, Electronic City Phase 1 and 
Phase 2 (part) that is home to various IT and ITES such as Infosys, HCL, Velankini Software 
Park etc. Other manufacturing industries such as Bharat Heavy Electronic Limited and 
Garment manufacturing industry Arvind Mills along with Biotechnology industri es are also 
located in this PD. .  
8. Commercial and office spaces such as Salarpuria office complex and Commercial and Business 
complex of Crowne Plaza is located here. The land of Electronics City initi ally acquired by 
KIADB area (late 1970s), was sold to KEONICS where individual industries were b ought land 
off KEONICS.  The area was collectively maintained by KEONICS and Gram Panchayats (o f 
Doddathoguru and Konappana Agrahara). After which ELCIA (Electronic City Industrial 
Association) was founded to look after maintenance and funds in 1997.   ELCITA (Electronic 
City Industrial Township Authority) founded in 2003 under the Municipalities Act. 
Land Use  
9. The predominant land use is under vacant land use with ~32.95% of the PD land  area 
followed by agriculture land use with ~25.28% of land area. Due to the  presence of the 
Electronic City, the industrial land use accounts for ~11.66% and that of resi dential land use is 
13.4%.   
10. The residential land use in the PD can be augmented significantly to cater to the e xisting 
employment and economic node. This PD shows characteristic of being mixed land use, due 
to industrial and office space along with residential land use. This is because the trend is 
increasingly, conversion of industrial land use to residential land use.  Therefore, strat egies 
such as walk to work can be employed with extensive NMT employed as a sustainable 
transport mechanism. Figure 29-1 and Table 29-1 presents the existing land use and existing 
land use area statement for PD 16 respectively. 
Figure 29-1: PD 28 Existing Land Use Map  
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
29-3 
Table 29-1: PD 28 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 232.09 12.92 
Commercial 24.36 1.36 
Industrial 241.50 13.44 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 103.70 5.77 
Public Semi Public 30.88 1.72 
Pubic & Semi Public - Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 1.40 0.08 
Parks & Open Spaces 10.09 0.56 
Transport and Communication 80.21 4.47 
Vacant 293.38 16.33 
Agriculture 720.56 40.11 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 1.76 0.10 
Water Bodies 56.44 3.14 
Total 1796.38 100.00 
 
Housing and Slums 
11. Residential land use (13.4%) has residential character is of layout typolog y, with villa plots 
along with high rise apartment typology. The Planning District has Thunga L ayout in 
Mylasandra, Chamundeshwari layout in Electronic City. Unoccupied Residential layouts i n 
villages of Hommadevanhalli and Mylasandra. Some high rises are also locate d proximal in 
Electronic City area. Additionally, service apartments and PG accommodation are also fo und 
here, due to the educational institutions and IT industry. The existing residential characte r 
comes across as layout typology, with villa plots along with high rise ap artment typology. 
(Smriti Nagar and Nirmal Nagar etc.) 
Traffic and Transportation 
12. 175 km is the approximate road length in this PD. Hosur Road is the major ar terial road in the 
PD along with the Electronic City elevated Toll Expressway over the Hosur road that connects 
the Electronic City to the Silk Board Junction. The important interchanges are Electron ic City 
elevated corridor meets the Electronic city on the either sides of the Hosur road (i.e. 1st main 
road and the loop that meets the 2nd cross road.). The NICE Ring road is accessible al ong the 
northern boundary of the PD. Other local roads in the PD are Begur-Koppa road and Neeladri 
road, Villasandra main road, CK Palya road, Wipro Avenue, Velankani road. 
13. As proposed by the BMRCL, metro alignment of Phase II has coverage within this P D which is 
extension of the Yellow Line on the Mysore road. The 2 metro stations in thi s alignment are 
Electronics City 2 metro station and Huskur road metro station.  
14. The Transport infrastructure in this PD includes 1 BMTC bus depot located at Electronic City, 
Phase II along the Hosur road. 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
29-4 
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
15. There are no metered water supply and sewage and sanitation connections in this PD. Ther e 
is one fire station located in the Electronic City and 2 numbers of exi sting 66 kV substation 
located in this PD. The social infrastructure in this PD is 30 schools along with o ther 
educational institutions such as IIIT, Institute of Bioinformatics and Biotechnology Sikkim  
Manipal University. 
Park and Open Spaces 
16. There are some parks and open spaces, most of which are within private townships, not 
accessible to public. Some layouts have the neighbourhood level parks or CA sites.  
17. There are two quarry sites located in this PD. One large quarry located and that is spread at 
Vittasandra and Mailasandra, and the other one located at south-west of the PD, in  the 
village, Bettadasanapura. 
Lakes and Drainage 
18. The lakes in the PD are Rayasandra lake, Ittasandra Kere, Chikkakammanahalli, lake 
Mylasandra lake, Hommadevanahalli Kere.  
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: DEVELOPMENTAL ACTIVITIES IN THE EASTERN PART OF PD DUE TO 
LOCATION OF ELECTRONIC CITY AND DENSIFICATION OF RESIDENTIAL AREAS IN A PLANNED 
MANNER, IMPROVED TRANSPORT CONNECTIVITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSIT 
INTEGRATION. 
 
PROPOSALS 
1. The RMP2031 proposes densification of the residential areas in a planned manner alon g with 
increased public transport share and other transit integration and infrastructure upgradation.  
The Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use area statement are presented in Figure 
29-2and  
2. Table 29-2 respectively.  
3. The RMP2031 proposes city level public transport infrastructure of Metro alon g the Hosur 
road that provides connectivity and accessibility to Electronic City. It i s provided by BMRCL 
through the Phase II Metro. 
4. The RMP2031 also proposes 1 BMTC Bus depot at Bettadasanapura Cross, near the jun ction 
of Begur-Koppa road and the Bettadasanapura Bypass road. This depot is located at the edge 
of the PD boundary.  Additionally, 1 BMTC bus stations is proposed along the Neeladri road. 
5. Transit Oriented Development Zone is proposed to be applicable around all Metro  rail / rail 
stations/terminals located in the Planning District. 
6. In order to improve the accessibility to Public Transport Stations (Metro,/BMTC Bus Stations ) 
it is proposed to strengthen the existing road network by providing footpaths and cycle 
tracks. 
 
 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
29-5 
 
Figure 29-2: PD 28 Proposed Landuse Map  
 
 
Table 29-2: PD 28 Proposed Landuse Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 490.25 47.71 
Commercial 7.72 0.75 
Industrial 258.66 25.17 
Public & Semi Public 49.68 4.83 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 3.44 0.33 
Parks / Open Spaces 34.67 3.37 
Transport & Communication 100.25 9.76 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 0.65 0.06 
Water Bodies 25.95 2.53 
NGT Buffer 56.28 5.48 
Total Developable Area 1027.55 100.00 
Agriculture 769.38 - 
Total PD Area 1796.38 - 
 
7. Further, to improve overall connectivity within and with other areas outside planning d istrict 
following improvements are proposed network connectivity enhancement: 
a. Peripheral Ring Road:  It is proposed to develop the 100m RoW Peripheral Ring Road 
that runs partly through the western most part of the PD in the village 
Hommadevanhalli and Basavanapura. It forms the outer ring to the NICE ring road.   

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
29-6 
b. Connectivity between Begur Koppa road and Neeladri road: This provides  access and 
connectivity to Bettadasanapura and Niladri Nagar. 
c. Overall Geometric Improvement of Certain Roads: Apart from Master Plan Roads, 
RMP2031 proposes overall geometric improvement of certain roads which  includes 
uniform right of way and cross –section, provision of Pedestrian and wherever possible 
NMT facilities.  
8. RMP2031 proposes that a detailed parking plan be prepared for identified areas of PD. 
9. To provide comfort to pedestrians and improve street aesthetics, the RMP20 31 proposes 
road side and avenue plantation for arterial roads, sub-arterial and important roads.  
10. The RMP2031 proposes the quarry sites spread over the villages, at Vitasandra and  
Mailasandra to be developed as an open space cum large Regional Park that  cater to the 
citizens of the south of BMA. Additionally, the quarry site at Bettadasanapura is also  
proposed as Open Space in this PD. 
11. The natural drainage within the PD have been classified as following: 
a. Streams downstream of naranyanaghatta kere (Singena Agrahara kere) = Secondary 
b. Drainage downstream  of Mylasandra lake and  Vittasandra lake = Tertiary 
12. The RMP2031 proposes that these streams  be kept free of all encumbrances, slude, SWM, 
and no sewahe  be allowed to flow into the streams and lakes. It is therefore proposed that 
all lakes  be properly interconnected and rejuvenated. 
13. The RMP2031 proposes the lake protection and rejuvenation of all lakes and th eir natural 
streams by preparing lake and surrounding area development. 
14. To cater to future management and operations of Solid Waste, it is proposed that 5 Dry 
Waste Collection Centres, 2 Bio-Methanation Unit, 3 Organic Waste Collection Centres, 3  
Aggregator, 2 Central Processing Unit and 1 Integrated Waste Processing Plants are p roposed 
to be developed within the Planning District. 
15. The RMP2031 proposes for an additional of 220kV Substation to cater to the fu ture power 
demand and 2 Fire Stations in this PD. 
16. The RMP2031 proposes a comprehensive Disaster and Hazard Mitigation Pl an be prepared 
for the low lying and flood prone areas in this PD.  
17. RMP2031 proposes that BBMP, in accordance to the provisions of Street Vend ing Act, 2015, 
determines the areas for Informal activities/ Street Vending and detailed upgradation  plans 
for such areas/ roads/ streets are prepared. 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD 28 Doddathoguru – Electronic City: 
1. Road Development Plan  
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Category – 1 
Roads and other categories in phased manner. 
b. Upgradation of Master Plan Roads  
i. Peripheral Ring Road 
ii. Hosur Road  
iii. Begur-Koppa Road Neeladri road,  
iv. Villasandra main road 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
29-7 
v. CK Palya road 
vi. Wipro Avenue 
vii. Velankani road 
c. Junction Improvement Programme 
i. Intersection of Hosur Road and 2nd cross road  
ii. Intersection  of Hosur road and 1st main road (under the Electronic City 
flyover),  
iii. Intersection between Neeladri road and Bettadasanapura road 
2. Development of Public Transport System 
a. Namma Metro 
i. Metro Phase II of Yellow Line. 
ii. Metro PRR 
3. Accessibility Improvement Plans: 
a. For Planned Station (Metro & Mono Rail) 
b. For Electronic City 
4. Preparation of Parking Plans for Commercial Areas/ Public Buildings / Places: 
a. Hosur Road 
b. Wipro Avenue Road 
5. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes and Streams:  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification  of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Preparation of Lakes & Streams Rejuvenation Plan : 
a. RMP2031 Streams Rejuvenation Plan 
b. Rayasandra lake Rejuvenation Plan 
c.  Ittasandra Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
d. Mylasandra lake Rejuvenation Plan 
e.  Chikkakammanahalli lake Rejuvenation Plan 
f. Hommadevanahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Surrounding Area development plan to be prepared to upgrade the drainage and 
sewage infrastructure to stop flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as 
dumping of SWM.  
6. Declaration of Street Vending Zones/ Areas/ Streets 
7. Development of Physical Infrastructure/ Facilities: 
a) SWM Dry Waste Collection Centre:   5 Nos. 
b) SWM Organic Waste Collection Centre:   03 Nos 
c) Bio-Methanation Unit:                                                02 No.s 
d) Aggregators:                                                                 03 No.s 
e) Central Processing Unit:                                             02 No.s 
f) Integrated Waste Processing Plants:                       01 No.s 
g) 220kv Sub-station:                   01 Nos 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
29-8 
8. Preparation of Disaster and Harzard Mitigation Plan for Electronic Cit y  
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
30-1 
30. PD 29: HULIMANGALA 
 
A. EXISTING STATUS 
1. The Hulimangala Planning District admeasures 1630 Ha (16.30 sq.km.) and comprises of 5 
villages namely, Sarvamanya S. Bingipura, Nanjapura, Vabasandra, Hulimangala and 
Maragondanahalli. Hulimangala being the largest Gramathana. All these villages ar e withi n 
Hulimangala Gram Panchayat.  
2. As per Census 2011, there are 14600 residents and of which 43.2 % are workers. Populati on 
growth has witnessed 74% decadal growth rate with maximum growth in the areas adjoinin g 
to Electronic city and Jigani Bommasandra Industrial Area. The total resident workers a re 
6318 (43 % of the population). There are 3574 households with average househo ld size 4.1, 
which is slightly higher than the average household size in BMA (4.01). The Average Gros s 
density is 9 pph, whereas the net residential density is around 190 pph.  
3. GƌaŵathaŶa͛s ;ǀillage settleŵeŶtsͿ aƌe the ŵaiŶ ƌesideŶtial aƌeas, ǁhile uŶoĐĐupied 
residential layouts and High rise apartment are present towards the eastern side. Maj or 
GƌaŵathaŶa͛s aƌe HuliŵaŶgala aŶd S. BiŶgipu ra.  
4. PD is predominantly agriculture in nature and is witnessing scattered unplanned 
developments. Agriculture land use accounts for 80% of PD area, followed by residentia l 
accounting for 4.94%. Water bodies and streams account for 4.0% whereas.8% of the land 
area is under industrial use and quarrying sites over ~36ha of land (2.19 % of the PD area). 
Around 2.79% of the land use in this planning district is under industri es this is due to 
presence of industries adjoining to Jigani – Bommasandra Industrial Area, brick kilns (which 
are temporary in nature, and stone crushing activities. Figure 30-1  presents the existing land 
use map Table 30-1  presents the existing land use area statement respectively.  
Population (2011 Census): 14,600 
Area of PD: 1630 ha 
Gross Density (2011 Census): 09 pph 
Villages in PD: 5 
Gram Panchayat: Hulimangala  
 
The Planning District 29 is located in the 
extreme south of BMA sharing LPA 
boundary and abutting to Jigani - 
Bommasandra Industrial area (towards 
its south east) and Electronic City 
(towards its North east). The major 
landmarks in the area are the Indian 
Institute of Health Management and 
Research (IIHMR).  
 
RMP2031 proposes limiting the growth in 
the areas adjoining to Electronic City and 
Jigani – Bommasandra Indutrial Area, 
Gramathana Development and 
Development of Rural/ Village Roads.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
30-2 
Figure 30-1: PD 29 Existing Land Use Map 
 
Table 30-1: PD 29 Existing Land Use Area Statement  
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 80.47 4.94 
Commercial 3.65 0.22 
Industrial 45.46 2.79 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 35.66 2.19 
Public Semi Public 14.73 0.90 
Pubic & Semi Public - Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 0.11 0.01 
Parks & Open Spaces 3.48 0.21 
Transport Communication 62.84 3.86 
Vacant 376.02 23.07 
Agriculture 941.84 57.78 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 1.05 0.06 
Water Bodies 64.69 3.97 
Total 1630.00 100.00 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
30-3 
5. Begur – Koppa road, Begur – Harapannahalli Road, Neeladari Road, Hulimangala road, 
Shikaripalya main road and village roads define the present connectivity within the PD. The 
Jigani-Bommasandra link road is connected through the Hulimangala Cross ro ad and the 
Bannerghatta Road through the Begur-Koppa road. Certain Roads of  Jigani –Bommadasandra 
Industrial terminates at the BMA/ PD boundary.  
6. There is a gap in access to healthcare facilities and the planning district is devoid of metered 
water supply and sanitation connections, etc. However, a landfill site (at the Bettadasanapura 
Cross) and one 66kv sub-station is located within the PD. Institutions such as Indi an Institute 
of Health Management and Research (IIHMR) and few international schools are located i n 
this PD.  
7. The major lakes in this PD are Hulimangala Kere, Bingipura Kere, Maragondanahall i Kere 
Vabasandra lake, Nanjapur Kere , Tirupalya Kere-1 (partly), Jigani Kere (Part) and o ther lakes 
as per Revenue records.  
8. Being in the peripheral areas of BMA, there are no provisions of parks and open space s 
presently, while large parts of the PD are vacant. There is very good potential to earmark land 
for parks and open spaces for the future. 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: RISTRICTED GROWTH, GRAMATHANA DEVELOPMENT, IMPROVED 
CONNECTIVITY, AND CONSERVATION/ PROTECTION OF LAKES & STREAMS 
PROPOSALS 
1. RMP2031 proposes growth in areas adjoining to Jigani-Bommasandra  Industrial Area and 
Electronic City –limiting the growth to eastern side of the PD. Thus, a very limited area has 
been added to conurbation limit and mainly for residential purpose. 
2. The Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use Distribution for the PD are depicted in 
Figure 30 – 2 and Table 30- 2. 
3. The RMP2031 proposes to guide the village development and improved conn ectivity such 
that there is a wholesome approach to infrastructure upgradation and livability. The focus is 
on village development and hence it is proposed to prepare Village Devel opment Pl an 
comprising of Infrastructure Development within Gramathana, development of Gramathana 
peripheral road, development of village roads (to improve accessibility), lake rejuvenation 
and lake area development, development of Bus Stations, development of SWM facili ties, 
etc.  
4. The Proposed land use map and Proposed Land Use distribution is depicted in  Figure 30-2 & 
Table 30-2 respectively .  
5. A PD level Park on the present quarry sites (in Hulimmangala Village ad join to Vabasandra 
Village) is proposed to be developed for providing recreational faciliti es to residents and 
industrial workers. 
 
 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
30-4 
Figure 30-2 PD 29 Proposed Land Use Map 
 
Table 30-2: PD 29 Proposed Landuse Area Statement  
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 161.66 53.72 
Commercial 5.53 1.84 
Industrial 35.53 11.81 
Public & Semi Public 2.37 0.79 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 0.00 0.00 
Parks / Open Spaces 5.93 1.97 
Transport & Communication 50.52 16.79 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 0.00 0.00 
Water Bodies 9.76 3.24 
NGT Buffer 29.63 9.85 
Total Developable Area 300.94 100.00 
Agriculture 1329.06 - 
Total PD Area 1630.00 - 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
30-5 
6. To improve the public transport facility it is proposed to develop BMTC bus stations at 
Hulimangala, S. Bingipura, Vasbasandra, along Neeladri road and at Nanjapura Gramathana . 
In addition, a Bus Depot/ Terminal is proposed to be developed at Bettadasanapura Cro ss 
along the PRR alignment. 
7. The RMP2031 proposes development of five village roads (existing stretches with limited new 
stretches) running west to east linking Begur – Koppa/ Harappanahalli Road to Jigan 
Bommasandra Industrial Area and Electronic City New Town Road. In addition, it is  proposed 
to widen Begur Koppa Road, Hulimangala Road, Hulimangala – Vabasandra Road with 
extension till BICON park (on eastern side) and till Beguru Harappanahalli Road  (on western 
side), roads within this PD. A Gramathana periphery road is proposed to be de veloped for S. 
Bingipura, Hulimangala and Vabasandra Villages.  
8. A City level SWM landfill site is proposed to be developed at quarry site at S. Bingipura village 
and at the same location, it is proposed that Integrated Waste Processing Yard to be 
developed. Further, it is proposed to develop a Dry Waste Collection Centre in each village. 
One organic waste converter is proposed to be developed at quarry site in Hulimangala.  
9. The RMP2031 proposes the protection and conservation of all lakes and the natural streams. 
The RMP proposes a Lake Rejuvination and lake surrounding area  
10. To mitigate provide comfort to pedestrians and NMT facilities and improve street aesthetics, 
the RMP2031 proposes road side and avenue plantation for all master  plan roads and village 
roads as indicated in the proposed land use plan for the Planning District.  
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has been broken down the proposals into implementable programs and projects 
for every planning district. Following are the projects for PD29, Hulimangala: 
1. Village Development Pla ns 
2. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes  and Streams :  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Rejuvenation of Lakes & Streams : It is proposed that a detailed Lake and Stream 
Rejuvenation Plan be prepared and taken up under Village Development Plan.  
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Area development plan be prepared.  
3. Development of Park: A PD level park is proposed to develop at the present quarry site in 
Hulimangala.   
4. Road Development Plan: Most important master plan road proposals includes a) PRR, 
b)Hulimangala Main Road (extending till Jigani Lake), c)Begur Koppa Road , d)Begur - 
Harappanahalli Road, e) Road Connecting Neeladri Road and Institute of Health Man agement 
Research, etc. It is proposed that geometric design of existing and proposed road n etwork 
should be undertaken.  
5. Development of Public Transport System:  
a. Bus Depot: One at quarry site near Bettadasanapura Cross  
b. BMTC Bus Stations: It is proposed to develop Bus Station at following locations: 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
30-6 
i. Hulimangala Village (next to Gramathana Periphery Road) 
ii. Vadasandra Village (at Quarry Site near Vadasandra Village Boundary) 
iii. S. Bingipura Village (next to Gramathana Periphery Road) 
iv. Hulimangala Village (near Institute of Health Management Research) 
6. Development of Gramathana Periphery Roads and Village Roads: It is proposed to develop 
gramathana periphery roads for following gramathans (as indicated in PLU Map). 
7. Junction Improvement Programme (JIP): JIP for geo-metric improvements is proposed for 
following intersections: 
a. Bettadasanapura Cross,  
b. Hulimangala Junction (Tri-junction of Road Connecting Neeladri Road and IIHMR and 
Hulimangalal Road),  
c. Vabasandra Junction,  
d. Hulimangala Cross Junction,  
e. Vadasandra – Thirupalaya Road Intersection, 
8. Development of SWM Facilities:  
a. Land Fill and Integrated Waste Processing Yard: A regional level combined facility 
where in landfill and integrated waste processing yard is proposed to be developed 
at quarry site at S. Bingipura.  
b. Construction of DWCC: One each in Gramathana  
c. Organic Waste Converter: One near quarry site in Hulimangala.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
31-1 
31. PD 30: BANNERUGHATTA 
 
A. EXISTING STATUS 
1. The Bannerughatta Planning District admeasures 5293 Ha (52.93 sq km) comprises of 18 
villages namely, Kannaikana Agrahara, Bhoothanahalli, Bilvadarahalli, Bannerughatta Kaval , 
Bhyrappanahalli, Bannerughatta, Halesampigehalli, Laskshmipura, Kallakere, Vaderahalli, 
Sakalavara, Mantapa, Nallasandra, Begihalli, Ramasandra, Hullakasavanahalli, 
Bhujengadasana Amanikere, Hullahalli. Bannerughatta Village is major Gramathana. These 
villages are falling within Bannerughatta Gram Panchayat and Mantapa Gram Panchayat.  
2. BaŶŶeƌughatta NatioŶal Paƌk ;BNPͿ, it͛s EĐo -sensitive Zone (ESZ) as defined by Ministry of 
Environment and Forest (MoEF), Government of India (GoI), and Eco-tourism defines the 
characteristics of this planning district. Bannerughatta National Park/ Forest and Zoo logical 
Park are major tourist destinations of the State.  
3. The MoEF, GoI draft notification S.O. 2116(E) dated 15.06.2016 declaring Eco Sensiti ve Zone 
around Bannerghatta National Park Karnataka has defined the the extent of Eco-sensitive 
zone and the regulates the land use and activities within the Eco-Sensitive zones around 
national parks & wildlife sanctuaries.  
4. The extent of the BNP within Local Planning Area of Bangalore Development Authority is 
approximately 15.89 sq km. The BNP/ forest falls within 11 villages (part or full ). Figure 31-1 
presents the extent of BNP on Cadastral Village Map, whereas Table 31-1 presents the details 
of forest lands within LPA of BDA .  
Population (2011 Census): 33275 
Area of PD: 5293 ha 
Gross Density (2011 Census): 06 pph 
Villages in PD: 19 
Gram Panchayats: Bannerughatta and 
Mantapa  
 
The PD is located in the south most 
boundary of the BMA. This PD has been 
carved out based on Bannerughatta 
Forest/ National Park and its Eco-
Sensitive Zone. The National Park is a 
tourism spot and attracts huge tourist 
footfalls.  
 
The RMP2031 proposes the environment 
protection and promotion of eco- tourism 
as per the notification on Eco-Sensitive 
Zone for the Bannerghatta National Park 
by the MoEF. Broadly the RMP2031 
proposes that the present status quo be 
maintained except for the natural growth 
of existing Gramathanas. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
31-2 
Figure 31-1: PD 30 Map Showing GPS Points of Bannerghatta Wild Life Range, Bann erghatta 
National Park on Cadastral Village Map 
 
Source: MoEF, GoI draft notification S.O. 2116(E) dated 15.06.2016 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
31-3 
Table 31-1: PD 30 Villages within LPA of BDA with BNP  
Sl.No. Village Name Taluk District 
1 Piliganahalli Bangalore south Bangalore Urban 
2 Gottigere Bangalore south Bangalore Urban  
3 Basavanpura Bangalore south  Bangalore Urban  
4 Hommadevanahalli Bangalore south  Bangalore Urban  
5 Kalkere Anekal  Bangalore Urban  
6 Vaderahalli Anekal  Bangalore Urban  
7 Gollahalli Anekal  Bangalore Urban  
8 Bannerghatta Anekal  Bangalore Urban  
9 Byrappanahalli Anekal  Bangalore Urban  
10 Mantapa Anekal  Bangalore Urban  
11 Begihalli Anekal  Bangalore Urban  
12 Bilwaradahalli Anekal  Bangalore Urban  
13 Bhuthanahalli Anekal  Bangalore Urban  
14 Bannerghatta Kaval Anekal  Bangalore Urban  
 
5. The Eco-Sensitive Zone proposed along the Bannerghatta National Park, varies between 
100m to 1 km or full village from its boundary. Within LPA of BDA ESZ is applicable to 13 
villages (in part or full). Table present the list of villages of LPA of BDA falli ng within the Eco-
Sensitive Zone as per Draft MoEF notification, whereas Figure 31-2 & Figure 31-3 presents 
the extent of ESZ on the existing land use map and revenue village map respectively.  
Table 31-2: PD 30 Villages of LPA of BDA falling within ESZ of BNP  
Sl.
no Map 
Id *  Village Name ESZ Distance from BNP 
Boundary Taluk Extent (ha) 
1 2 3 4 5 7 
1 1 Piliganahalli 100 mtr Bangalore 
south 0.180 
2 2 Gottigere 100 mtr Bangalore 
south 8.940 
3 3 Basavanpura 100 mtr Bangalore 
south 13.420 
4 4 Hommadevanahalli 100 mtr Bangalore 
south 12.420 
5 5 Kalkere 100 mtr Anekal 37.970 
6 6 Vaderahalli Entire village boundary Anekal 74.800 
7 7 Gollahalli Entire village boundary Anekal 70.900 
8 8 Bannerghatta Entire village boundary Anekal 427.990 
9 9 Byrappanahalli Entire village boundary Anekal 136.360 
10 10 Mantapa Entire village boundary Anekal 432.090 
11 11 Begihalli Entire village boundary Anekal 207.650 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
31-4 
Sl.
no Map 
Id *  Village Name ESZ Distance from BNP 
Boundary Taluk Extent (ha) 
12 24 Bilwaradahalli 100 mtr Anekal 35.640 
13 25 Bhuthanahalli 100 mtr Anekal 63.120 
Source: MoEF, GoI draft notification S.O. 2116(E) dated 15.06.2016 . * as per MOEF notification 
Figure 31-2: PD 30 Extent of Eco-Sensitive Zone of Bannerughatta National Park on ELU  
 
Figure 31-3: PD 30 Extent of Eco-Sensitive Zone of Bannerughatta National Park on Villa ge Map  
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
31-5 
6. As per Census 2011, there are 33275 residents and of which 46% are workers. Population 
growth has seen 71.9% decadal growth rate with maximum growth in Gotti gere village. The 
total resident workers in this PD are 15895, which makes up 46% of the population. There are 
8285 households in this PD, with average household size 4 which is same as the average 
household size in BMA (4.01). The Average Gross density is 6 pph and the resid ential density 
is 192.85pph 
7. Industrial units such as Sakalwara Industrial Estate, Glass factory are present, while Quarrying 
activities and stone crushers are seen in the Kanikana Agrahara village. A few resorts clubs, 
hotel and other commercial activities are in the proximity of the BNP. There are severa l 
educational institutions present in this area and in Bannerughatta village.   
8. Bannerghatta road and Sakaleshwar road are the main arterial roads in this PD that further 
connect to Kanakpura road and Jigani-Anekal road respectively. 
9. Agriculture (~54.24%) is predominant activity while large share of land (28.9%) is under fo rest 
land. The residential areas (including Gramathanas) accounts for 3.8% of total area. 
Gramathanas are main stay for residential areas however, while unoccupied residential 
layouts which are sparsely located are also seen. The quarries accounts for 2.4% of total ar ea. 
Figure 4 presents the existing land use map whereas Table 3 presents the existing land use 
statement.  
10. There are no metered water supply and sewage and sanitation connections in this PD. There 
is an electric substation in the Bannerughatta village. This PD has a few international  schools 
and a nursing college, AMC college campus, campus of Union Bank Staff Training College etc.  
11. The existing landuse is represented by the map Figure 31-4 and the landuse area stament is 
presented in Table 31-3.  
Table 31-3: PD 30 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 201.56 3.58 
Commercial 49.46 0.88 
Industrial 87.08 1.55 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 129.21 2.29 
Public Semi Public 128.56 2.28 
Pubic & Semi Public - Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 0.42 0.01 
Parks & Open Spaces 14.20 0.25 
Transport and Communication 459.34 8.15 
Vacant 7.54 0.13 
Agriculture 2863.89 50.82 
Forest 1529.61 27.15 
Streams 3.78 0.07 
Water Bodies 160.24 2.84 
Total 5634.89 100.00 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
31-6 
Figure 31-4: PD 30 Existing Land Use Map  
 
 
12. There is scope of developing Sports facilities due to availability of vacant lands, agricultural 
lands, and quarries which may be filled and developed as parks and playgrounds.  
13. The larger lakes like Sakalavara Lake, Mantapa Lake, Bidrekere Lake and Bannerghatta Lake 
(part of the Hulimavu lake series) are within the planning district and prov ides an opportunity 
for their protection and rejuvenation.  
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION (ECO-SENSITIVE ZONE OF BANNERUGHATTA 
NATION PARK AND LAKES & STREAMS), PROMOTION OF ECO-TOURISM, GRAMATHANA 
DEVELOPMENT, IMPROVED RURAL CONNECTIVITY.   
PROPOSALS 
1. RMP2031 proposals are guided by Bannerughatta Forest and Eco-sensitive zone, where it 
proposed to retain all approved existing developments and promote the eco -tourism 
activities within Eco-sensitive zone for Bannerughatta Forest as per draft notification S.O. 
2116(E) dated 15.06.2016 issued by the Ministry of Environment and Fores t. The final extent 
of Bannerughatta Forest Eco-Sensitive Zone shall be as notified by MoEF. The a reas outside 
Eco-sensitive Zone are proposed to be retained as Agriculture Zone. The developments within 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
31-7 
this planning district are proposed to be guided by regulations imposed  by MoEF Notification 
and Zoning Regulations for Planning Zone C of RMP 2031.  
2. The RMP2031 proposes village development and improved the connectivity thro ugh Village 
Development Plan comprising of Infrastructure Development within Gramathana, 
development of Gramathana peripheral road, development of village roads (to impr ove 
accessibility), lake rejuvenation and lake area development, development of Bus Statio ns, 
development of SWM facilities, etc.  
3. A regional park is proposed to be developed in the existing mine/ quarry area in Anjanapura, 
Kannaikana Agrahara and Golahalli village. It is also proposed that all the mines/ qu arries 
area adjoining to Forest Boundary (Bannerughatta Village, Laxmipura Village) and within PD 
(Vaderahalli) to be developed as Village Forests/ Park.  
4. The Proposed Land Use Map and Propose land use distribution is presented in Figure 31-5 
and Table 31-4  respectively.  
 
Figure 31-5: PD 30 Proposed Land Use Map 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
31-8 
Table 31-4: PD 30 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 225.45 58.48 
Commercial 0.00 0.00 
Industrial 0.00 0.00 
Public & Semi Public 25.12 6.52 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 10.98 2.85 
Parks / Open Spaces 4.43 1.15 
Transport & Communication 53.97 14.00 
Forest 22.95 5.95 
Streams 1.29 0.34 
Water Bodies 5.51 1.43 
NGT Buffer 35.80 9.29 
Total Developable Area 385.51 100.00 
Agriculture 5249.39 - 
Total PD Area 5634.89 - 
5. A large playground is proposed to be developed in mine/ quarried area fall ing in 
Halesampigehalli, Lakshmipura, Bannerughatta, and Gollahalli located at place where al l four 
village boundaries meet corner and one  in village Hullahalli (near northern boundary of 
Village above the proposed Peripheral Ring Road).  
6. To improve the public transport facilities, it is proposed to develop at two lo cations Bus 
Terminal cum Depots. One at Ragihalli Gate Cross (as indicated in Proposed Land Use map ) 
along the Bannerughatta Main Road and second at Anjanapura village, abutting BMICAPA  
boundary and on existing quarry area. 
7. To improve the connectivity, the RMP2031 proposes development road connecting 
Bannerughatta Main road and Beguru Harappanahalli Road (using existing stretches with 
limited new stretches) running west to east. It is proposed to develop a road conn ecting 
Sakalavara Road and Dinnepalya Road. The existing Sakalavara Road and Existing Road (via 
Malle Nalasandra) meeting at Ragihalli Gate Cross) is proposed to be widened to 24m and 
develop as an alternative to Bannerughatta Main Road for bypass traffic. In additio n, it is 
proposed to develop connectivity improvement links with the PD as shown in  Proposed Land 
Use Map.  
8. A City level SWM Integrated Waste Processing Yard is proposed to be developed at q uarry 
site at Anjanapura village. Further, it is proposed to develop a Dry Waste Collection  Centre in 
each village. 
9. The RMP2031 proposes the protection and conservation of Sakalavara lake, M antapa lake, 
Bidrekere lake and Bannerghatta lake and other lakes and their natural streams. It is 
therefore proposed that a Lake Rejuvination and lake surrounding area plan be prepared and  
implemented .   
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD 30, Bannerughatta: 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
31-9 
1. Village Development Plans 
2. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes and Streams:  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Rejuvenation of Lakes & Streams : It is proposed that a detailed Lake and Stream 
Rejuvenation Plan be prepared and taken up under Village Development Plan.  
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Area development plan be prepared.  
3. Development of Parks: A large scale PD level park is proposed to develop at the presen t 
quarry site Located at Anjanapura, Kanikana Agrahara and Golahalli village. And PD  level park 
and playgrounds are proposed to be developed in the quarry sites at Golahal li, Laskhmipura 
& Bannerughatta villages respectively.  
4. Road Development Plan:  
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Category - 1 
Roads.  
i. Development of PRR,  
ii. 24 m RoW road coming from Anjanapura 80 ft road Amruth nagar,  
iii. 24 m Sakalwara main road  
iv. 18m Row proposed road at Lakshmipura village  
v. Byataranara ǇaŶa ƌoad eǆteŶdiŶg till Weaǀeƌ͛s ĐoloŶǇ  
vi. Villages Roads (12m and 15m wide) as shown in PLU Map 
b. Development of Gramathana Periphery Roads and Village Roads : It is proposed to 
develop gramathana periphery roads for following gramathans (as indicated in PLU Map) 
i. Hullahalli 
ii. Sakalavara 
iii. Malle Nallasandra 
c. Junction Improvement Programme (JIP):  JIP for geo-metric improvements is proposed for 
following intersections: 
i. Junction of proposed PRR and the proposed 18 m wide road at Pilaganahalli villa ge. 
ii. Junction between PRR and Bannerghatta road 
iii. Junction between Bannerghatta Road and Dinnepalya road 
iv. Junction between Bannerghatta road and Sakkalvara road 
v. Junction between Bannerghatta road and Kaggadasapura road 
vi. Junction at Bannerghatta road and Ragihalli Gate 
5. Development of Public Transport Infrastructure :  
a. Bus Depots:  
i. At Ragihalli Gate Cross along the Bannerughatta Main Road  
ii. At Anjanapura village, abutting BMICAPA boundary and existing quarry area. 
b. BMTC Bus Stations  
i. Hullahalli Village: near Hullahalli Cross Bus Stop  
ii. Sakalavara Village: along Sakalavara Road near T-Junction next to Telecommu nication 
Tower. 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
31-10 
6. Development of Sanitation / SWM Facilities:  
a. Integrated Waste Processing Yard: A regional level integrated waste processing yard is 
proposed to be developed at quarry site at Anjanapura. 
b. Construction of DWCC: One each in Gramathana  
c. Construction of 1 STP at Bilwardali 
7. Development of Regional Level Fire Station at Bannerughatta Villa ge: It is proposed to 
develop fire station by filling abandoned quarry site in Bannerughatta Village .  
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
32-1 
32.  PD 31: AGARA 
 
A. EXISTING STATUS 
1. The Agara Planning District admeasures 1876.43 Ha (18.76 sq km) and comprises of 4 villages 
(some fully and some partly) namely, Agara, Badamanavarthakaval (T2), 
Badamanavarthakaval (T1; partly), Obichudahalli and Uttarahalli Manavarthakaval. These 
villages are in Agara and Kaggalipura Gram Panchayats.  
2. As per Census 2011, there are 12925 residents, an increase by 96.5% from the year 2001 
(6578). The total resident workers are 5476, which makes up 46.9 % of the population. Ther e 
are 3158 households with average household size 4.1 which is higher than the av erage 
household size in BMA (4.01). The Average Gross density in this PD is 7 pph. 
3. The planning district is characterized by predominantly agriculture landscape (Agriculture 
land use accounts for 78% of PD area), presence of Art of Living Ashram, Karnataka State 
Sericulture Research & Development Institute, Indus Business Academy and institutions 
belonging to the Art of Living, and scattered unoccupied residential layo uts. Public Semi-
public Use (4.49%) is more than residential land use (3.49%). There is one A yurvedic hospital 
within the campus of Art of Living Ashram. Kanakapura Road (NH209), Pipeline Road, 
Devagere Road and the village road network defines the connectivity. Figure 32-1 and Table 
32-1 presents the existing land use map and existing land use area statement for PD. 
 
 
 
Population (2011 Census): 12925 
Area of PD: 1876.43 ha 
Number of Villages: 04 
Gross Density: 07 PPH 
 
The Agara Planning District (No 31) is 
located at the south-western edge of 
BMA and flanked by the BMICAPA (NICE 
Corridor), three sides the north, east and 
west. Kanakapura road (NH209), and 
Devagere Road (Connecting NH209 & 
NH275 (Mysore Road) are two important 
roads passing through the predominantly 
agriculture landscape.   
 
RMP2031 proposes to preserve the 
present status while allowing for natural 
growth.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
32-2 
Figure 32-1: PD 31 Existing Land Use Map  
 
Table 32-1: PD 31 Existing Land Use Area Statement  
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 58.64 5.40 
Commercial 4.53 0.42 
Industrial 8.13 0.75 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 63.32 5.83 
Pubic & Semi Public - Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 20.01 1.84 
Parks & Open Spaces 20.01 1.84 
Transport Communication 58.75 5.41 
Vacant 1.70 0.16 
Agriculture 841.29 77.40 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 1.41 0.13 
Water Bodies 9.09 0.84 
Total 1086.88 100.00 
 
4. City level public infrastructure in the north-eastern part of the PD which has a Ca uvery Water 
Pumping Station on Kanakapura Road and a KPTCL sub-station in Thathaguni. In  terms of 
social infrastructure, there are 18 schools, most of them serving neighbouring plannin g 
districts. Being in the peripheral areas of BMA; some areas in this planning district do  not 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
32-3 
have access to primary schools within 1 km walking distance. Only some settlements ha ve 
basic educational infrastructure like anganwadi/ primary schoo l. 
5. There are three lakes within the PD, the biggest one Agara lake is mostly outside the PD , 
while other two lakes are within the PD.  
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: PRESERVATION, GRAMATHANA DEVELOPMENT, IMPROVED 
CONNECTIVITY.  
PROPOSALS 
1. The RMP2031 proposes preservation while allowing natural growth, gramathana 
development and connectivity improvement. The RMP2031 proposes to gui de the village 
development and improved connectivity such that there is a wholesome appro ach to 
infrastructure upgradation and livability. The focus is on village development a nd hence it is 
proposed to prepare Village Development Plan comprising of Infrastructure Develop ment 
within Gramathana, development of Gramathana peripheral road, development of village 
roads (to improve accessibility), lake rejuvenation and lake area development, d evelopment 
of Bus Stations, development of SWM facilities, etc. Figure 32-2 and  
2.  
3. Table 32-2 present the Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use Distribution fo r 
planning District.  
Figure 32-2: PD 31 Proposed Land Use Map  
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
32-4 
 
Table 32-2: PD 31 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 0.00 0.00 
Commercial 0.00 0.00 
Industrial 0.00 0.00 
Public & Semi Public 0.00 0.00 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 0.00 0.00 
Parks / open spaces 0.00 0.00 
Transport & 
Communication 0.00 0.00 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 0.00 0.00 
Water Bodies 0.00 0.00 
NGT Buffer 0.00 0.00 
Total Developable Area   0.00 
Agriculture 1087.77 - 
Total PD Area 1087.77 - 
 
4. To improve the public transport facility it is proposed to develop BMTC Bus Statio n cum Bus 
Depot at Agara Cross and Bus Stations at Agara, Obichudahalli and Basappanapalya.  
5. In addition to Peripheral Ring Road, the RMP2031 proposes widening of Devagere Road ( from 
Agara Cross (on Kanakapura Road) to Kumbalgodu Cross (On Mysuru Road) from existing 
width to 24m. The RMP2031 also proposes development of village roads (e xisting stretches 
with limited new stretches) to improvement connectivity within the planning distri ct. 
Gramathana Periphery road is proposed to be developed for Banjarapalya and Gangasandra.  
6. A City level Regional Fire Station is Proposed to be developed along the Kanakapura Road.  
This fire station will service BMA and certain areas falling within Kanakapura LPA.  
7. It is proposed to develop a Dry Waste Collection Centre in each village. One o rganic waste 
converter is proposed to be developed in Agara Village.  
8. The RMP2031 proposes the protection and conservation of all three lakes within  PD. It is 
therefore proposed that a Lake Rejuvenation and lake surrounding area plan be prepared.  
9. To provide comfort to pedestrians and cyclists, the RMP2031 proposes  road side and avenue 
plantation for all master plan roads and village roads as indicated in the prop osed land use 
plan for the Planning District.  
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD31: 
1. Village Development Plans  
2. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes  and Streams :  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
32-5 
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Rejuvenation of Lakes & Streams : It is proposed that a detailed Lake and Stream 
Rejuvenation Plan be prepared for all lakes within this PD. 
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Area development plan be prepared .  
3. Road Development Plan:  
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Category - 1 
Roads: 
 Peripheral Ring Road 
 Devagere Road 
 Kanakapura Road  
b. Development of Village Roads 
 Agara to Thimmegowdana Palya Road via Banjarapalya  
 Road from Devagere Road to Banjarapalya via Basappanpalya   
 Road from Banjarapalya to Uttari 
 Road from Basappanpalya to Uttari  
 New Village Road Links  
 New Village Road Links  
 Gramathana Periphery Roads  
c. Junction Improvement Programme: 
 Agara Cross Junction  
 Thathaguni Cross Junction 
 Intersection of Existing and New Links 
d. Development of Gramathana Periphery Roads 
4. Development of Public Transport System:  
a. Bus Station cum Depot: One at Agara Cross  
b. BMTC Bus Stations: It is proposed to develop Bus Station at following locations: 
i. Agara Village  
ii. Obichudahalli  
iii. Basappanapalya  
5. Development of SWM Facilities:  
a. Construction of DWCC: One in Agara Village  
b. Organic Waste Converter: One in Agara Village  
6. Development of Regional Fire Station 
 Fire Station: Near Thathaguni Cross  
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
33-1 
33. PD 32: ULLALU – KENGERI 
Population (2011 Census): 1, 00,882  
Area of PD: 2451 ha 
Wards in PD: 4 (2 part) 
Gross Density: 41.15 pph 
The Planning District 32, Ullalu-Kengeri 
is located at south west of the BMA 
planning area. The Vrishabhavathi 
River flows through the PD, rendering 
several areas in this PD, ecologically 
sensitive. The PD is bound ed by BMIC 
(NICE) along the West and South and 
shares its boundary with BMICAPA 
area and the NICE Corridor. 
 
The RMP2031 proposes densification of 
the residential areas in a planned 
manner along with increased public 
transport share and other transit 
integration and infrastructure upgradation. 
1. The Ullalu- Kengeri Planning District comprises of 4 wards in total.  The wards b eing  two 
wards Ullalu (130) and Kengeri (159); partly in BMIC, one village (Kengeri Go llahalli) and 
western part of Hemmigepura ward (198). 
2. The urban character is low rise, medium dense with residential areas concentrated in Kengeri 
Satellite town, Rajarajeshwari nagar, Banashankari 6th Stage, Jnanabharti, Sonnenahalli, 
Shirke Layout, SMV layout. Major work and IT centre of Global Village is located in this PD. 
3. Mysore road, 80 ft road of the Kengeri Satellite town, Dodda basti mai n road, Kommaghatta 
road, Dr. Vishnuvardhan road, Railway parallel road, Kenchanahalli road, Pattangere road / 
Global Village road are the major roads within this PD. Additionally the NICE ring road is also 
accessible from the western boundary of the PD. 
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography 
4. As per Census 2011, PD 32 has a population of 1,00,882, with a decadal growth of 119% fr om 
the year (2001-2011). The work force participation rate 41% of the population. The gros s 
density is 41.15 pph and the residential density is 242.2 pph.  
5. There are 25,161 households in this PD, with average household size 4.01, which is sam e as 
the average household size in BMA (4.01).   
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
33-2 
Industry and Commerce 
4. The total workforce in this PD is 41,501. The major employment node in the PD is the Global 
Village SEZ, which has IT/ITES industries. There are also a few industries and factories along 
the Mysore road. Neighbourhood commercial areas along 80 ft road (passing throug h the 
Kengeri Satellite Town) cater to the existing residential areas. 
Existing Land Use  
5. The predominant land use is under vacant land use with ~46.76% of the PD land area which 
has potential for development and densification.  Approximately 17% of the l and use in this 
planning district is under residential owing to the upcoming layouts. The agricu ltural land use 
share in the total area 19.14%. ~9.47 % of the land area is under transportation and 
communication land use. Figure 33-1 and Table 33-1  presents the existing land use map amd 
existing land use area statement for PD 32. 
Figure 33-1: PD 32 Existing Land Use Map  
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
33-3 
Table 33-1: PD 32 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 424.77 17.33 
Commercial 61.52 2.51 
Industrial 50.24 2.05 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 94.39 3.85 
Pubic & Semi Public - Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 14.90 0.61 
Parks & Open Spaces 34.86 1.42 
Transport Communication 232.15 9.47 
Vacant 990.49 40.40 
Agriculture 469.22 19.14 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 20.50 0.84 
Water Bodies 58.49 2.39 
Total 2451.52 100.00 
 
Housing and Slums 
6. Residential land use (17.33%) has the residential character of low rise layout type. Residential 
areas are concentrated in Kengeri Satellite town and layouts in the north of the PD, such as 
Rajarajeshwari nagar, Banashankari 6th Stage, Gnanabharti, Sonnenahalli, Shirke Layout, SMV 
layout etc. There are many upcoming layouts and apartments in the PD.  
7. There are 15 slums located in 3 slums out of which 2 are notified. The ward with most 
number of slums is Kengeri (ward no. 159) where 7 slums are located within it. Th e 
populations residing in the slums are 10,325 which accounts for 10.2% of the PD population.  
Traffic and Transportation 
8. The main arterial roads in this PD are the Mysore road that runs diagonally fron the centre of 
the PD. The other major roads are Dodda Basti main road, 80 ft road of the K engeri Satellite 
town, Kommaghatta road that meets from the western side that connects to Mysore road, 
Dr. Vishnuvardhan road that meets from the eastern side that connects Mysore road, Railway 
parallel road, Kenchanahalli road. It is noteworthy that the PD is bounded by th e BMICAPA 
along its western and southern boundary. Hence the NICE ring road is accessible from this P D 
through the interchanges at Mysore road and also accessible is the NICE expressway. 
9. Railway line passes through this PD, with stations of Kengeri Railway Station, Nyan adahalli 
Railway Station and Jnanabharti Railway Station are located on this railway line.  
10. 1 BMTC bus Depot and one BMTC TTMC, both at Kengeri are located in this PD.  
11. Metro services are proposed and currently under implementation by the BMRCL with  
alignment along the Mysore road (3 metro stations of the Green Line; Keng eri metro station, 
Mallasandra metro station and Pattangere RVCE metro station). 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
33-4 
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
12. As per BWSSB, the percentage coverage of households having metered water connectio ns is 
~42% and percentage of households having sewage connections is ~26%. Ther e are 2 GSLRs, 
1 STP at Kengeri, the Vrishabhavathy Tertiary Treatment road located at Hemmigepura ward 
(ward no. 198) and 3 pumping stations. As per BBMP, there are 2 Dry Was te Collection 
Centres located in this PD.  
13. Social infrastructure in this PD includes 61 schools in this PD. Several institut es of higher 
education like BGS group of institutions and RV engineering college are located in this 
planning district. There are 5 private and government hospitals (including BGS Hospital ). 
There is a police station in this planning district. 
 
Park and Open Spaces 
14. This PD locates the Thurahalligudda State amd Reserved Forest and the Mailasandra 
Reserved Forest. There are several neighbourhood parks that are part of various layouts. 
Only 1.42 % of the total land in this PD is under Parks and Open Spaces. This indi cates a lack 
of open spaces in this Planning district.   
 
Lakes and Drainage 
15. The primary stream of Vrishabahavathi river runs north east to south directionof this PD. 
There are many plantations along Vrishabhavati River which passes through the PD. The 
major lakes in the PD are Kengeri kere, Hosakere Lake, Dubasipalya kere, Uttrahalli Lake, 
Gandhinagar, Ullal kere and Mallasandra kere 1. 
 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS : DENSIFICATION OF RESIDENTIAL AREAS IN A PLANNED MANNER, 
IMPROVED TRANSPORT CONNECTIVITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSIT INTEGRATION AND 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION. 
PROPOSALS 
 
1. The RMP2031 proposes densification of the residential areas of Banashankari 6th stage, 
Rajarajeshwari nagar, BEML layout, Kengeri Satellite Town, Sir M. Vishveshwaraiiah layout,  
SMV layout of Ullalu in a planned manner along with increased public tran sport share and 
other transit integration and infrastructure upgradation. Figure 33-2 and Table 33-2 presents 
the Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use analysis for the Planning District. 
2. RMP2031 proposes city level public transport infrastructure of Metro Rail  and LRT/Mono 
Rail/BRT running along roads within the Planning District to ensure a great er share of public 
transport and to improve connectivity and accessibility. 
a. Railway Station : Better accessibility and connectivity to Kengeri railway station 
catering to the CRS public transport. 
b. Metro on Mysore Road: It is proposed to extend the metro on Myso re road (Green 
Line) with stations of Kengeri metro station, Mallasandra metro station and 
Pattangere RVCE metro station, whose construction is currently ongoing. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
33-5 
c. Metro on PRR: It is proposed to develop metro rail all along the Perip heral Ring Road 
/ NICE Ring Road, that is accessible from the western boundary of this PD. 
d. LRT/Mono Rail/BRTS on Inner Peripheral Ring Road: LRT/ Mono Rail/ BRT is  proposed 
on the 30 m RoW Inner PRR passing through the PD. Stations are proposed at J SS 
Academy of Technical Education bus stop, stations at junction of Inner PRR and 
Mysore road.    
Figure 33-2: PD 32 Proposed Land Use Map  
 
 
 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
33-6 
Table 33-2: PD 3 2 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 1293.16 52.75 
Commercial 25.77 1.05 
Industrial 66.06 2.69 
Public & Semi Public 166.52 6.79 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 12.49 0.51 
Parks / Open Spaces 166.22 6.78 
Transport & Communication 324.04 13.22 
Forest 40.85 1.67 
Streams 20.05 0.82 
Water Bodies 52.14 2.13 
NGT Buffer 284.21 11.59 
Total Developable Area 2451.52 100.00 
Agriculture 0.00 - 
Total PD Area 2451.52 - 
 
3. The RMP2031 proposes 1 Inter State Bus Terminal (ISBT) next to the existing BMTC TTMC.  
4. The RMP2031 proposes 1 intermodal interchange at junction of Mysore r oad, NICE ring road 
and the NICE Expressway.  
5. In order to improve the accessibility to Public Transport Stations (Metro/B MTC Bus Stations) 
it is proposed to strengthen the existing road network by providing footpaths and  cycle 
tracks. This will greatly enhance first and last mile connectivity to the Pub lic Transport 
Stations.  
6. Further, to improve overall connectivity within and with other areas outside planning district 
following improvements are proposed network connectivity enhancement: 
e. Inner Peripheral Ring Road:  It is proposed to develop the 30m RoW Inner P eripheral Ring 
Road that is concentric and runs between the two rings of Outer Ring Road and 
Peripheral Ring Road.  
f. Connectivity between Mysore road, Rajarajeshwari nagar and Kengeri Satellite Town to 
be improved through the proposed 30 m wide Inner PRR.  
g. Better Connectivity to Global Village and areas such as BEML layout. 
i. Overall Geometric Improvement of Certain Roads: Apart from Master Plan Roads, 
RMP2031 proposes overall geometric improvement of certain roads which includ es 
uniform right of way and cross –section, provision of Pedestrian and wherever 
possible NMT facilities. Also include improvement of junction on these  roads. These 
roads are a) Mysore road b) Inner PRR c) Kommaghatta Road d) Dr. Vishnuvardhan 
Road e) Dodda Basti Main Road e) Pattanagere Main road f) Global Village Tech Park 
Road 
7. The RMP2031 has identified 8 road junctions that are to be taken up for ge ometric 
improvements for better and smoother flow of traffic. 
8. RMP2031 proposes that a detailed parking plan be prepared by BBMP for identified areas. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
33-7 
9. The Planning District drains into the Vrishbhavathi River. The natural driange within the P D 
have been classified as following: 
a. Drainage Primary downstream of Vrishabhavathi River that flows from Nayandahalli 
lake towards Kumbalgodu lake = Primary 
b. Drainage downstream of Valagerahalli lake connecting the Vrishabhavathi stream = 
Tertiary 
10. The RMP2031 proposes that these streams  be kept free from encumberances, sludge, SWM, 
and no sewage  be allowed to flow into the streams and lakes. It is therefore proposed that 
all lakes  be properly interconnected and rejuvenated. 
11. The RMP2031 proposes the lake protection and rejuvenation of the primary stream o f 
Vrishabhavathy river and of Kengeri kere, Hosakere lake, Dubasipalya kere, Uttrahalli lake, 
Gandhinagar, Ullal kere and Mallasandra kere 1 and its natural streams by preparing lake an d 
surrounding area development plan. 
12. The RMP2031 recognizes the present status of slums and potential for in-situ (to the extent 
possible) Redevelopment of Slums and proposes that slum redevelopment be taken in a 
phased manner.  
13. To cater to future management and operations of Solid Waste in future, it is proposed that in 
addition to existing facilities, 3 Dry Waste Collection Centres, 1 Organic Waste Collection 
Centres, are proposed to be developed within the Planning District by BBM P. 
14. The RMP2031 proposes for an additional of 220kV Substation to cater to the f uture power 
demand and 1 additional STP for future demand. 
15. It is essential to have good and quality access to social infrastructure; hence it is  proposed to 
have 1 Fire station and 1 burial and cremation ground.  
16. To provide comfort to pedestrians and improve street aesthetics, the RMP20 31 proposes 
road side and avenue plantation for arterial roads, sub-arterial and important roads.  
17. The RMP2031 proposes a comprehensive Disaster and Hazard Mitigation Plan  be prepared 
for the low lying and prone at areas of,  Ganapathipura along Chunchagahatta road, Maruth i 
Nagar located south of Chunchaghatta lake, Vittal Nagar and Subramanyapura on either sid es 
of Dorai lake. 
18. RMP2031 proposes that BBMP, in accordance to the provisions of Street Vend ing Act, 2015, 
determines the areas for Informal activities/ Street Vending and detailed upgradation plans 
for such areas/ roads/ streets are prepared. 
 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS  
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD 32 Ullalu - Kengeri: 
1. Road Development Plan:  
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development for Category 1 
b. Upgradation of Master Plan roads 
i.Mysore Road 
ii.Kommaghatta Road  
iii.Dr. Vishnuvardhan Road  
iv.Dodda Basti Main Road 
v.Pattanagere Main road  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
33-8 
vi.Global Village Tech Park Road 
c. Junction Improvement Programme 
i. Intersection between SMV Layout 3rd Block and Govt. Press Layout at Ullalu Village  
road 
ii. Junction at Mariyappanapalya bus stop 
iii. Junction at Kenchanapura Cross bus stop, between Dodda Basti Main road and 4th 
Main Road 
iv. Intersection between Oddarapalya Bus stop road and Old Outer RingRoad. 
v. Junction at Sonnenahalli bus stop on the Dodda Basti road 
vi. Junction near Kengeri Police Station on the Mysore road (Below the bridge) 
vii. Intersection at Mysore road and Dr. Vishnu Vardhan road 
viii. Intersection at Mysore road and Pattangere main road (that connects Global 
Village Tech Park) 
2. Development of Public Transport System 
a. CRS 
i. Railway line from Mysuru along the Kengeri Railway Station and till ORR 
b. Namma Metro 
i. Metro Phase II of Green Line. 
ii. Metro Phase III along PRR / NICE Ring Road 
 
c. LRT/Mono Rail/BRTS  
i. Along Inner PRR 
3. Accessibility Improvement Plans: 
a. For Planned Stations (Railway, Metro & Mono Rail) 
b. Inetrmodal Interchanges 
c. BMTC Bus TTMC 
d. For Global Village Tech Park and surrounding areas 
1. Preparation of Parking Plans for Commercial Areas/ Public Buildings / Place s: 
a. Mysore Road 
b. Inner PRR  
2. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes and Streams:  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification  of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Preparation of Lakes & Streams Rejuvenation Plan : 
i. RMP2031 Streams Rejuvenation Plan 
ii. Kengeri kere Rejuvenation Plan 
iii. Hosakere lake Rejuvenation Plan 
iv. Dubasipalya kere Rejuvenation Plan 
v. Uttrahalli lake Rejuvenation Plan 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
33-9 
vi. Gandhinagar Rejuvenation Plan 
vii. Ullal kere Rejuvenation Plan  
viii. Mallasandra kere 1 Rejuvenation Plan 
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Surrounding Area development plan to be prepared to upgrade the drainage and 
sewage infrastructure to stop flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as 
dumping of SWM.  
3. Declaration of Street Vending Zones/ Areas/ Streets 
4. Development of Physical Infrastructure/ Facilities: 
h) SWM Dry Waste Collection Centre:   03 Nos. 
i) SWM Organic Waste Collection Centre:  01 Nos. 
j) 220kv Sub-station:                  01 Nos. 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
34-1 
34. PD 33: HEROHALLI 
Population (2011 Census): 2,19,451 
Area of PD: 2321 ha 
Wards in PD: 3 
Gross Density: 86 pph 
The Planning District 33 , Herohalli is 
located at Western boundary of the 
BMA . PD is characterised 
predominantly by residential 
development abutting Peenya 
Industrial Area and has large tracts of 
vacant land. PD shares its boundary 
with BMICAPA.  
The RMP2031 proposes densification 
of the residential areas in a planned 
manner along with transit integration 
and infrastructure upgradation and 
planning for parks and open spaces. 
 
1. The Herohalli PD comprises of 3 BBMP wards-Herohalli (72), Dodda Bidarakall u (40), 
Hegganahalli (71), of Dasanapura Zone and three villages (in parts & full) nam ely 
Thirumalapura, Chikkabidarakalu and Srikantapura falling between BBMP and BMICAPA 
boundary. 
2. The urban character is low-rise, highly compact in certain pockets with mainly plotted and 
some sporadic development pattern with residential areas of Maruthi layout, Ragavendra 
nagar, Venkateshwara layout, BEL layout Phase I, Byregowda layout, Sir M Vishveshwaraiah 
layout, ITI Employees Layout, SBI colony, Syndicate Bank Employees Ho using Society, SMV 
layout 7th block, 8th block. 
3. Tumkuru Road (NH 4) and Magadi road (SH 85), Andirahalli Main Road and Kuvemp u Road 
are the major roads in this Planning District. The NICE ring road is accessible from the 
Western boundary with the interchange at BIEC along the Tumkuru road. 
A. EXISTING STATUS 
Demography 
4. As per Census 2011, PD 33 has a population of 2,19,451 with a decadal growth o f 179.8% 
from the year (2001-2011). The work force participation rate 48.62% of the pop ulation.  
5. There are 58,870 households in this PD, with average household size 3.7, which is lesser as 
the average household size in BMA (4.01).  
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
34-2 
Industry and Commerce 
6. There are two pockets of industrial developments: South of Peenya Industrial Area, and  along 
the Tumkuru road. Byraveshwara Industrial Estate in Hogganahalli ward and Ragavendra 
industrial estate 
 
Existing Land Use  
7. The predominant land use is under vacant land use accounts for ~36.32 % of the PD land area 
which has potential for development and densification. Residential land use accou nts for 
~22.76% of the PD area. Agriculture land use accounts for ~12.79%. 
Transport/Communication land uses accounts for ~ 9.4%. Industrial land use accounts for 
~5.3% since the PD contains a part of Peenya Industrial Area. Figure 34-1 and Table 34- 1 
present the Existing Land Map and Existing Land Use analysis for this PD. 
Figure 34-1: PD 33 Existing Land Use Map  
8.  

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
34-3 
Table 34-1: PD 33 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 517.47 22.29 
Commercial 61.20 2.64 
Industrial 122.98 5.30 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 110.94 4.78 
Pubic & Semi Public - Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 6.17 0.27 
Parks & Open Spaces 20.15 0.87 
Transport Communication 217.76 9.38 
Vacant 828.46 35.69 
Agriculture 358.78 15.46 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 5.94 0.26 
Water Bodies 71.45 3.08 
Total 2321.31 100.00 
 
Housing and Slums 
9. Spatially the PD has the as low-rise, highly compact in certain pockets, with plotte d 
developments in some areas and sporadic development in other areas. The built charac ter in 
this PD is variable, and is low rise and high density in the Herohalli ward  due to residential 
areas of Maruthi layout, Ragavendra nagar, Venkateshwara layout, BEL layout Phase I, 
Byregowda layout, Sir M Vishveshwaraiah layout, ITI Employees Layout, SBI colony , Syndicate 
Bank Employees Housing Society, SMV layout 7th block, 8th block.  
10. There are vacant but upcoming layouts in ward of Dodda Bidarakallu in areas such as 
Lingadheeranahalli, Tippenahalli etc.  
11. The Gross density is 86 pph and the average residential density is 94.5 pph.  The gross density 
is highest in Hegganahalli ward (338 pph) and the least is in Thirumalapura vi llage which is 
uninhabited. 
12. There are 13 slums located in the 3 wards in the PD out of which 1 slum is notified . The ward 
with most number of slums is Dodda Bidarakallu (ward no. 40) where 6 slums are located 
within it. The population residing in slums is 12,619 which accounts for 5.8% of the PD 
population.  
 
Traffis and Transportation 
13. As proposed and implemented by the BMRCL, metro alignment of Phase II has coverage 
within this PD which is extension of Purple Line on the Tumkuru road. The 2 metro station s in 
this alignment are Jindal metro station and Manjunathnagar metro station. 
14. The main arterial roads in this PD are Tumkuru Road (NH 4) and Magadi road (SH  85) that 
provide connectivity to PD, however internal connectivity lacks plann ed hierarchy as only 
Andirahalli Main Road and Kuvempu Road provides for the internal conn ectivity. It is 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
34-4 
noteworthy that the PD is bounded by the BMICAPA along its western boundary. Hence  the 
NICE ring road is accessible from this PD through the interchange at BIEC along th e Tumkuru 
road. 
 
Physical and Social Infrastructure 
15. As per BWSSB, the percentage coverage of households having metered water connectio ns is 
~8.3% and percentage of households have sewage connections is ~5%. There are 1 GSLRs, 1 
STP located next to the Dodda Bidarakallu lake in the Dodda Bidarakallu, and 1 In termediate 
Sewage Pumping Stations (ISPS). As per BBMP, there are 1 Central Processing Unit and 2  Dry 
Waste Collection Centres located in this PD. According to KPTCK, there are 1 66Kv  substations 
located here. 
16. Social infrastructure in this PD includes 86 schools in this PD. and several high er educational 
institutions. Prominent educational institutions in this area are Jindal Public Sc hool, Basava 
Academy of Engineering, Sri Venkateshwara Nursing Collage, and East West Group of 
Colleges. There are 4 government and private healthcare centres in this PD. There is 1 fire 
station located in this PD. 
 
Park and Open Spaces 
17. There are not adequate parks, playgrounds and open spaces in this PD.  
 
Lakes and Drainage 
18. The lakes in this PD are part of the Vrishabhavathi Valley and which drains into the 
Byramangala Reservoir near Bidadi and finally joins the Cauvery River near Meked attu, 
Kanakapura. The lakes in this PD are, Dodda Bidarakallu lake, Madwara lake (part), 
Karivobanahalli lake, Nallakadiranahalli (part), Gangondanahalli (part), Handrahalli lake, 
Lingadheeranahalli lake,  Herohalli Lake 1, Herohalli lake 3, Andrahalli Lake, Mall athalli Lake. 
 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS : DENSIFICATION OF RESIDENTIAL AREAS IN A PLANNED MANNER, 
IMPROVED INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSIT INTEGRATION AND PLANNING OF PARKS AND OPEN 
SPACES. 
PROPOSALS 
1. The PD extent falls under the Planning Zone B, with its eastern part fully d eveloped. The 
RMP2031 proposes densification in the western part of the Planning District of areas in BEL 
layout (1st Phase & 2nd Phase), Byregowda layout, Vishvesharaya Nagar 8th block, , 
Lingadheeranahalli, Tippanahalli, Mysore lamps Employees Cooperative Society  layout, 
Vinayakanagar, Dooda Bidarakallu, Anchepalya and Ravi Kirloskar layout and regulation of 
densities in areas of D-Group layout, Syndicate Bank layout,  Vidhyamanya nagar, 
Raghavendra nagar, Byraveshara naga, Maruti layout etc.The Proposed Land Use Map and 
the Proposed Land Use Area statement are given in Figure 34-2 and Table 34-2 respectively. 
2. RMP2031 proposes city level public transport infrastructure of Metro Rail  and LRT/Mono 
Rail/BRT running along roads within the Planning District to ensure a larger share of public 
transport and to improve connectivity and accessibility: 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
34-5 
a) Metro on Tumkuru Road: It is proposed to extend the Phase II, Metro on Mysore road 
(Purple Line) with the proposed stations (by BMRCL) Jindal metro station and 
Manjunathnagar metro station, whose construction is currently ongoing. 
b) Metro on PRR: It is proposed to develop metro rail all along the Peripheral Ring Road / 
NICE Ring Road, that is accessible from the western boundary of this PD. 
c) LRT/Mono Rail/ BRT on Inner Peripheral Ring Road: The alignment of the 30 m RoW Inn er 
PRR and the LRT/Mono Rail/BRT  that caters and passes through the BEL layout, 
Byregowda layout, Sir Vishveshwariah layout, Handrahalli, Raghavendra nagar and 
Raghavendra Industrial Estate. 
Figure 34-2: PD 33 Proposed Land Use Map 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
34-6 
Table 34-2: Proposed Land Use Area Statement  
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 1391.34 59.94 
Commercial 24.40 1.05 
Industrial 86.10 3.71 
Public & Semi Public 119.92 5.17 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 26.58 1.15 
Parks / Open Spaces 48.35 2.08 
Transport & Communication 296.51 12.77 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 5.44 0.23 
Water Bodies 69.02 2.97 
NGT Buffer 253.66 10.93 
Total Developable Area 2321.31 100.00 
Agriculture 0.00 - 
Total PD Area 2321.31 - 
 
3. The RMP2031 proposes 1 BMTC TTMC near Bayalanjenyanagar Andrahalli bus stop. 
4. The RMP2031 proposes 1 Intermodal Interchange along the intersection of Mag adi road and 
NICE Ring Road.  
5. Transit Oriented Development is proposed to be applicable around all metro  located in the 
Planning District. 
6. In order to improve the accessibility to Public Transport Stations (Metro/B MTC Bus Stations) 
it is proposed to strengthen the existing road network by providing footpaths and  cycle 
tracks.  
7. Further, to improve overall connectivity within and with other areas outside planning d istrict 
following improvements are proposed network connectivity enhancement: 
a. Inner Peripheral Ring Road:  It is proposed to develop the 30m RoW Inner Perip heral 
Ring Road that is concentric and runs between the two rings of Outer Ring Road an d 
Peripheral Ring Road. Its alignment in this PD that runs from the south of the PD, 
which meets the Magadi road. It extends beyond the Magadi road as Handrahalli 
road to 18m that caters to BEL layout and meets Tumkuru road.  
b. Connectivity is proposed to be improvised in Dodda Biadarakallu villag e and 
Jinnagaramma layout, Andrahalli and Vidyamanya nagar and Lingadheernahalli.  
c. Overall Geometric Improvement of Certain Roads: Apart from Master Plan Roads, 
RMP2031 proposes overall geometric improvement of certain roads which includ es 
uniform right of way and cross –section, provision of Pedestrian and wherever 
possible NMT facilities. Also include improvement of junction on these roads. The  
roads are a) Magadi road b) Inner PRR c) Tumkur Road. 
8. The RMP2031 has identified 1 road junctions that is to be taken up for geometric 
improvements for better and smoother flow of traffic. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
34-7 
9. RMP2031 proposes that a detailed parking plan be prepared for Magadi road , Tumkur road, 
Inner PRR. 
10. To provide comfort to pedestrians and improve street aesthetics, the RMP2 031 proposes 
road side and avenue plantation for arterial roads and sub-arterial.  
11. Entire PD drains into Arakavati River and all the lakes are connected to Arakavati River  
through network of drains/ streams. The natural drainage within the PD have been cl assified 
as following: 
a. Drainage downstream of  Nallakadirenahalli lake 3 via Gangondanahalli lake 3 
towards Arkavathi river - Secondary 
b. Drainage downstream of Dasarahalli lake via Doddabidirakallu towards Madavara 
lake towards Arkavathi river – Tertiary. 
c. Drainage downstream of Handrahalli lake towards Gangondanahalli lake further 
continuing towards Arkavathi river  - Tertiary. 
d. Drainage downstream of Mallathhalli lake towards secondary stream connecting 
Vrishabhavathi River – Tertiary. 
12. The RMP2031 proposes that these streams  be kept free from encumbrances, sludge, SWM,  
and no sewage  be allowed to flow into the streams and lakes. It is therefore proposed that 
all lakes  be properly interconnected and rejuvenated. 
13. The RMP2031 proposes the lake protection and rejuvenation of are, Dodda Bidarakall u lake, 
Madwara lake (part), Karivobanahalli lake, Nallakadiranahalli (part), Gangondanahalli (part) , 
Handrahalli lake, Lingadheeranahalli lake,  Herohalli Lake 1, Herohalli lake 3, Andrahalli Lake, 
Mallathalli lake and its natural streams by preparing lake and surrounding ar ea development 
plan.  
14. To cater to future management and operations of Solid Waste in future, it is proposed that in 
addition to existing facilities, 6 Dry Waste Collection Centres, 1 Organic Waste Collection 
Centres, 1 Aggregator.  
15. The RMP2031 proposes for 1 additional of 220kV Substation to cater to  the future power 
demand. 
16. It is essential to have good and quality access to social infrastructure; hence it is  proposed to 
have 2 Fire station and 2 burial and cremation ground.  
 
17. The RMP2031 recognizes the present status of slums and potential for in-situ (to  the extent 
possible) Redevelopment of Slums. 
 
18. The open spaces and parks are proposed to be maintained and given good accessibility.  
 
19. RMP2031 proposes that BBMP, in accordance to the provisions of Street Vend ing Act, 2015, 
determines the areas for Informal activities/ Street Vending and detailed upgradation  plans 
for such areas/ roads/ streets are prepared.  
 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD 33 Herohalli: 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
34-8 
1. Road Development Plan:   
Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development for Category 1 
a. Upgradation of Master Plan roads 
i.Inner PRR or Ring 4 
ii.Magadi Road 
iii.Tumkuru Road 
 
b. Junction Improvement Programme 
Intersection between Magadi Road and the Inner PRR (E-West College road)  
2. Development of Public Transport System 
a. Namma Metro 
iii. Metro Phase II of Purple Line. 
iv. Metro Phase III along PRR / NICE Ring Road 
 
b. LRT/Mono Rail/BRT  
ii. Along Inner PRR 
3. Preparation of Parking Plans for Commercial Areas/ Public Buildings / Places  
a. Magadi road 
b. Tumkur road 
c. Inner PRR  
4. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes and Streams:  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification  of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Preparation of Lakes & Streams Rejuvenation Plan : 
i. RMP2031 Streams Rejuvenation Plan 
ii. Dodda Bidarakallu lake Rejuvenation Plan 
iii. Handrahalli lake Rejuvenation Plan 
iv. Lingadheeranahalli lake Rejuvenation Plan 
v. Herohalli Lake 1 Rejuvenation Plan 
vi. Herohalli lake 3 Rejuvenation Plan 
vii. Andrahalli Lake Rejuvenation Plan 
viii. Mallathalli lake Rejuvenation Plan 
ix. Karivobanahalli lake Rejuvenation Plan  
x. Madwara lake (part) Rejuvenation Plan 
xi. Nallakadiranahalli (part) Rejuvenation Plan 
xii. Gangondanahalli (part) Rejuvenation Plan 
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Surrounding Area development plan to be prepared to upgrade the drainage and 
sewage infrastructure to stop flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as 
dumping of SWM.  
5. Declaration of Street Vending Zones/ Areas/ Streets 
6. Development of Physical Infrastructure/ Facilities: 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
34-9 
a) SWM Dry Waste Collection Centre:   06 Nos. 
b) SWM Organic Waste Collection Centre:  01 Nos. 
c) SWM Aggregators:                                                      01 Nos. 
d) 220kv Sub-station:                  01 Nos. 
7. Preparation of Disaster and Harzard Mitigation Plan  
a) Flood prone areas of Kairobanahalli and  
b) Flood prone areas of along Magadi road next to Herohalli lake 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
35-1 
35. PD 34: CHIKKABANWARA 
                                                                                                    Population (2011 Census): 47043 
Area of PD: 2680.17ha 
Villages in PD: 18 
Gram Panchayats: Chikkabanawara, 
Vaderahalli, Somashettahalli and 
Kasaghattapura  
Gross Density: 18 pph 
The Chikkabanawara Planning District 
(PD No. 34) is located in the north-
western side in abutting to BBMP 
Boundary. It is characterised by 
haphazard developments along 
Hessarghatta Road and areas abutting 
to BBMP, and agricultural landscape.  
The RMP2031 proposes to promote 
planned growth while maintaining the 
present conurbation, integrate public 
transport systems, and environment 
protection.  
A. EXISTING STATUS 
1. Chikkabanawara Planning District admeasures 2680.17ha (26.80 sqkm) with 18 villag es from 
four different Gram Panchayats, namely – Chikkabanawara GP, Vaderahalli GP, 
Somashettahalli GP and Kasaghattapura GP. Village within PD are Vaderapura, 
Shyamarajapura, Lakshmipura, Guddahalli, Ganigerahalli, Chikkabanavara, Vaderahalli, 
Soladevanahalli, Somashetahalli, Kempenahalli, Medi Agrahara, By- lakere, Guni Agrahara, 
Veerasagara, Kalathammanahalli, Kasagata- pura, Kempapura, Kumbarahalli . The 
Hessaraghatta Road and Bengaluru – Mumabi Railway line run parallel to each other and 
through the PD. There are two stations within the PD, namely – Chikkabanavara and 
Soldevanahalli Railway Stations.  
2. Hessaraghatta Main Road (SH39), Ganigarahalli Main Road, Abbigere Main Road, 
Hessaraghatta Road (other than SH39), Abbigere Industrial Road, Kempapura Road, Bylake re 
Road, are few road that defines circulation network for PD.  
3. As per Census 2011, PD has 47,043 inhabitants, which has increased by 111.1% from 2 001 
(22,281) and there are 17,463 (37.12%) resident workers. There are 10,907 households 
(2011), with an average household size of 4.3, which is higher than BMA (4.0 1). The gross 
density is 17.5 persons per hectare (pph), whereas the average residential density is 206.65 
pph. The gross density is highest in Chikkabanavara village (43 pph) and the least in 
Vaderapura which is uninhabited. 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
35-2 
4. The planning district is witnessing haphazard and unplanned growth along the Hessaraghatt a 
Road and areas adjoining to BBMP Boundary, while majority of the land withi n earlier 
conurbation limit is still available for development. The upcoming de velopments are mainly 
plotted residential development and have about 20% of PD area under developmental 
activities. There are very few educational institutions like Arhcarya Group of Insistutions, Sri  
Krishna Institute of Technology that are present in PD along with 34 schools. Apart from 
Chikkabanavara Government Primary Healthcare Center there is no major healthcare facili ty 
within the PD. The agriculture use still accounts for more than 55%, while the residential use 
account for ~9%. Figure 35-1 and Table 35-1 present the existing land use map and existing 
land use area for PD respectively. 
5. The existing lake system consisting of 21 lakes flows into the Arakavathi River. The  
Chikkabanavara Kere, Kumbarahalli Kere, Ganigerahalli Kere, Lakshmipura Kere,  Vaderahalli 
Kere, Medi Agrahara kere, Guni Agrahara Kere, one unnamed lake in Guni Agrahara Revenue 
Village, Kalathammanahalli Kere, Bylakere kere, two unnamed lakes in Bylakere revenue  
village, Veerasagara kere, Kasagattapura Kere, two unnamed lakes in Kasagattapura revenue 
village and Atturu Kere.  
6. Water Supply is through Rural Development and Panchayat Raj Department, GoK. Mo st the 
developmental activities are dependent on ground water. There are no fire stations, burial 
ground/ crematorium/ cemeteries in PD. There is no SWM factility and sub-stations.  
 
Figure 35-1: PD 34 Existing Land Use Map 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
35-3 
Table 35-1: PD 34 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 225.12 8.40 
Commercial 18.31 0.68 
Industrial 32.19 1.20 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 90.76 3.39 
Pubic & Semi Public - Unclassified 15.37 0.57 
Public Utility 5.96 0.22 
Parks & Open Spaces 4.62 0.17 
Transport Communication 122.84 4.58 
Vacant 568.12 21.20 
Agriculture 1468.65 54.80 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 7.07 0.26 
Water Bodies 121.17 4.52 
Total 2680.17 100.00 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS:  PLANNED HIGH DENSITY GROWTH WITHIN CONURBATION AREA, 
IMPROVED CONNECTIVITY, CONSERVATION AND PROTECTION OF LAKES & STREAMS 
PROPOSALS 
1. This PD is witnessing road based development in areas adjoining BBMP which are haphazard 
and scattered. It becomes imperative that the RMP2031 directs for planned urban 
development and promotion of economic growth along proposed Peripheral Ring Road .  
2. RMP2031 proposes development of various economic nodes across BMA and  PD 
Chikkabanawara is one of these nodes (though not an SDZ) proposed to be developed. The  
guiding principles for developing PD as Special Development Zone is as following: 
a. Promotion of Economic Growth along Peripheral Ring Road 
b. Development of Grid Pattern Circulation System allowing higher FAR consumption  
c. Promotion of Transit Oriented Development around Metro  Stations  
d. Protection and Conservation of Lake System and Vrushabhavati River 
e. Planned Open & Open Spaces and Recreational Spaces 
3. Further, for the villages outside conurbation, the RMP2031 proposes to guide the village 
development and improved connectivity such that there is a wholesome appro ach to 
infrastructure upgradation. Hence, it is proposed to prepare Village Development Plan 
comprising of Infrastructure Development within Gramathana, development of Gramathana 
peripheral road, development of village roads (to improve accessibility), lake rejuvenation 
and lake area development, development of Bus Stations, development of SWM facili ties, 
etc.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
35-4 
4. The Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use Distribution for the PD are depicted in 
Figure 35-2 and Table 35-2 respectively. The proposed land use has been designed to 
promote the economic activities along PRR, while residential use zone would promote work 
live play concept. 
Figure 35-2: PD 34 Proposed Land Use Map 
 
Table 35-2: PD 34 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 848.01 54.14 
Commercial 24.40 1.56 
Industrial 83.22 5.31 
Public & Semi Public 57.61 3.68 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 4.87 0.31 
Parks / Open Spaces 99.86 6.38 
Transport & Communication 204.14 13.03 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 4.03 0.26 
Water Bodies 48.01 3.07 
NGT Buffer 192.10 12.26 
Total Developable Area 1566.25 100.00 
Agriculture 1113.92 - 
Total PD Area 2680.17 - 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
35-5 
5. The RMP2031 proposes large city sports complex in Medi Agrahara village whi ch is to be 
developed for providing indoor and outdoor sporting facilities. 
6. RMP2031 proposes network of public transport system for entire city and some these system 
passes through PD, which includes: 
a. CRS: RMP2031 proposes that CRS  be developed and two stations within the PD, 
namely Chikkabanavara and Soldevanahalli Railwaystations  be developed for 
passenger movement.  
b. Metro PRR: The proposed Metro PRR runs along the PRR which passes through the 
PD.  
c. Mono Rail Inner PRR: The Proposed Mono Rail link runs along the pro posed Inner 
PRR and passes through PD. 
d. Mono Rail Link Hessaraghatta Road: The proposed Mono Rail Link to Hessaraghatt a 
starts from Lottegahalli Railway Station (interchange with Metro + Railway) and runs 
along BEL Road and Hessaraghatta Road till Dodda Bylakere.  
7. Multimodal Interchange Stations are proposed to be developed at 3 locations namely 
Chikkabanawara Railway Station, Medi Agrahara and Bylakere depending on the feasibility. 
8. The RMP2031 proposes to develop ISBT cum Depot at Bylakere Village at the intersection of 
proposed PRR and Hessaraghatta Road and BMTC Station cum TTMC on Kempapura road. 
Further a Mini logistics hub proposed at Khasagattapura road.  
9. The RMP2031 proposes development/ upgradation of all existing roads as per RM P2031 
proposed right of way and typical cross section. A Gramathana periphery road is prop osed to 
be developed for Thagachakuppe and Devagere.  
10. To mitigate provide comfort to pedestrians and NMT facilities and improve street aesthetics, 
the RMP2031 proposes road side and avenue plantation for all master  plan roads and village 
roads as indicated in the proposed land use plan for the Planning District.  
11. RMP2031 has identified junctions for geometric design improvement and u pgradation of 
junction infrastructure. They include a) Chikka Banawara 5 arm Junction, b) Keregud ahalli Bus 
Stand Cross, c) LakshmiPura Cross, and intersection of all existing roads.  
12. The Natural drainage within PD has been classified as following: 
a. The streams from Chikkabanawara Kere till Arakavati River = Secondary,  
b. Otheƌ stƌeaŵs leadiŶg to otheƌ keƌe͛s aŶd fƌoŵ otheƌ keƌe͛s to seĐoŶdaƌǇ keƌe = 
Tertiary. 
13. The RMP2031 aims at the protection and conservation of streams and all lakes withi n the PD. 
Therefore it is proposed that a Lake and Stream Rejuvenation and Lake Surroundin g Area 
Plan is to be prepared. 
14. The RMP2031 proposes to develop a Dry Waste Collection Centre in each vil lage, hence 18 
DWCCs along with 2 OWCC, and 1 BMU are proposed to be developed within PD b y Gram 
Panchayats. Also, one STP is proposed to be developed by BWSSB. One 220kv Sub- station is 
also planned to developed within the PD 
15. The RMP2031 proposes development of Sports Complex, large Hospital, Fire Statoin and one 
crematorium within the Planning district.   
 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
35-6 
Programmes and Projects 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD34: 
1. Road Development Plan:  
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Category - 1 
Roads: 
i. Peripheral Ring Road 
ii. New Master Plan Roads 
b. Development of Village Roads as per RMP 2031 proposals  
c. Junction Improvement Programme: 
i. Chikkabanawara Junction  
ii. Laxmipura Cross  
iii. Keregudahalli Bus Stand Cross, 
iv. Intersection of Existing and New Links 
2. Development of Public Transport System:  
a. CRS 
b. Namma Metro:  
i. Metro PRR: Along Proposed PRR  
c. Mono Rail  
i. Inner PRR Mono Link  
ii. Hessaraghatta Road Mono Link  
d. ISBT cum Depot: at Bylakere Village along PRR  
3. Development of Multimodal Interchanges  
a. Chikkabanawara Railway Station (Mono+ Railway + Bus + IPT),  
b. Medi Agrahara (Mono + Mono +Bus+IPT)  
c. Bylakere (Metro + Mono + BMTC+IPT) depending on the feasibility. 
4. Development of Mini Logistic Hub 
5. Village Development Pla ns  
6. Development of Parks and Open Spaces 
a. Sport Complex (Medi Agrahara Village) 
b. Park and Open Spaces as earmarked in PLU Map 
7. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes  and Streams :  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Preparation of Rejuvenation Plan for Lakes & Streams :  
i. RMP2031 Streams Rejuvenation Plan 
ii. Chikkabanavara Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
iii. Kumbarahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
iv. Ganigerahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
v. Lakshmipura Kere Rejuvenation Plan,   
vi. Vaderahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan ,  
vii. Medi Agrahara kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
35-7 
viii. Guni Agrahara Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
ix. Rejuvenation Plan for one unnamed lake in Guni Agrahara Revenue Village,  
x. Kalathammanahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
xi. Bylakere kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
xii. Rejuvenation Plan for two unnamed lakes in Bylakere revenue village,  
xiii. Veerasagara kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
xiv. Kasagattapura Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
xv. Rejuvenation Plan for two unnamed lakes in Kasagattapura revenue village and  
xvi. Atturu Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Area development plan be prepared .  
8. Development of Social and Physical Infrastructure/ Facilities: 
a) Fire Station:    01 Nos. (Chikkabanawara Village)  
b) Crematorium:     01 Nos. 
c) Graveyard/ Burial Ground:   01 Nos. 
d) SWM Dry Waste Collection Centre:   18 Nos. 
e) SWM Organic Waste Collection Centre:  02 Nos. 
f) Bio-methanation Unit:    01 Nos. 
g) BWSSB Proposed STP:    01 Nos. 
h) 220kv Sub-station:    01 Nos.  
i) WTP, OHT, GLSR and STP   to be decided based on Water Supply & 
Sewage Network Plan 
9. Preparation of Water Supply and Sewarage Supply Network System for PD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
36-1 
36. PD 35: BETTAHALASURU -HUNASAMARANAHALLI 
SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT ZONE 
                                                                                                     Population (2011 Census): 18,373 
Area of PD: 3253 ha 
Villages in PD: 12 
Gram Panchayats: Bettahalasuru , 
Gantiganahalli , Sonnappanahalli and 
Hunasamaranahalli. 
Gross Density: 06 pph 
Bettahalasuru – Hunasamaranahalli 
Planning District (PD. No. 35) is located 
in the northern part of BMA along 
Bellary Road and shares with boundary 
with LPA of BIAAPA. It is witnessing 
heightened growth along Bellary Road. 
The PD is characteristed by 
predominant agriculture use, large 
quarry area, developments along 
Bellary Road and Yelahanka Airforce 
Station. 
The RMP2031 proposes to develop the PD as a Special Development Zo ne that would promote 
high density planned employment centres and residential d evelopments, while protecting 
environmentally sensitive areas.  
A. EXISTING STATUS 
1. The planning district is located in the northern fringes of BMA, outside the BBMP  jurisdiction 
along Bellary road. It comprises of 12 villages from four gram P anchayats, namely 
Bettahalasuru, Gantiganahalli, Sonnappanahalli and Hunasamaranahalli. Names of Villag es in 
PD are Byappanahalli, Sathanuru, Hunasamaranahalli, Sonnappanahalli, Bettahalasuru, 
Nallakunti, Sugatta, Gantigenahalli, Lakshmisagara, Muddanahalli, Nagadasanahalli, and 
Thimmasandra.  
2. Bellary Road, Yelahanaka Air Force Station and other defence establishments, number of 
educational institutions – like Sir M Visvesvaraya Institute of Technology , Krishnadevaraya 
College Of Dental Sciences & Hospital, Sindhu Eductional Institute, NITTE School Of 
Architecture,  Padukone - Dravid Centre For Sports Excellence, Bettahalsuru large Quarry site, 
11 lakes, Railwaline to Devanahalli (with station at Bettahalasuru, stone crushers, logi stic 
facilities/ godowns, and large agriculture use defines the charateristics of this PD. There  are 
15 schools, whereas there is a gap in healthcare amenities as there is no large hospital or 
medical facility available within the planning district. 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
36-2 
3. Bellary Road, Bagalur Road (SH 104), Sir MVIT Collage Road, proposed 30 m  wide road to 
Bengaluru International Airport, Sugatta Main Road, Hosahalli Main Road, existing 18m wide 
road leading to BIAAPA, and other existing road defines the present network. The existing 
land use map and existing land use area statement is given in Figure 36-1 and Table 36-1 
respectively.  
Figure 36-1: PD 35 Existing Land Use Map 
 
Table 36-1: PD 35 Existing Land Use Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 117.27 3.61 
Commercial 15.05 0.46 
Industrial 53.77 1.66 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 100.49 3.10 
Public Semi Public 84.13 2.59 
Pubic & Semi Public - Unclassified 426.34 13.14 
Public Utility 0.01 0.00 
Parks & Open Spaces 2.67 0.08 
Transport Communication 118.00 3.64 
Vacant 520.47 16.04 
Agriculture 1705.96 52.58 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 2.41 0.07 
Water Bodies 97.69 3.01 
Total 3244.26 100.00 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
36-3 
4. As per Census, in 2011, PD had 28594 inhabitants, which increased by decadal growth rate of 
55.6% (2001-2011). The work force participation rate is 42.2% of the total PD popu lation. 
There are 6995 households (2011), with an average household size of 4.08, which slightly 
more than BMA (4.01).  The gross density is 6 persons per hectare (pph).  
5. Mining in Bettahalasuru Quarry, Stone Crushing and Cement manufacturing units, 
automobile repair and service centres, commercial establishment along Bellary Road an d 
educational institutes are employment providers within PD.  
6. Existing Railway line defines the watersheds within PD, the areas on eastern side of railway 
line drain outside BMA, whereas areas on western side drain into Hebbala valley. There are 
11 lakes within PD and all are interconnected through network of drains.  
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT ZONE WITH PLANNED HIGH DENSITY GROWTH 
AND ENABLING ECONOMIC GROWTH, INTEGRATION OF CITY CIRCULATION NETWORK, AND 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION. 
PROPOSALS 
1. RMP2031 proposes development of various economic nodes/ special devel opment zones 
across BMA and PD Bettahalasuru - Hunasamaranahalli is one among these to be dev eloped 
as nodes/ zones. The guiding principles for developing PD as Special Develo pment Zone is as 
following: 
a. Promotion of Economic Growth on Work – Live – Play Concept 
b. Development of Grid Pattern Circulation System allowing higher FAR consumption 
while integrating existing road network  
c. Promotion of Transit Oriented Development around Metro Rail Stations  
d. Planning for Goods Transport 
e. Upgradation/ Provision of Physical Infrastructure within erstwhile gramathans (urban 
villages) 
f. Protection and Conservation of Lake System 
g. Planned Open & Open Spaces 
h. Banning of Mining, Quarrying and Crushing Activities within Conurbation Limits 
2. The Planning District has been designated as Special Development Zone and  be g overned by 
special regulations as stipulated in Zoning Regulations.  
3. The Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use Distribution for the PD are depicted in 
Figure  36-2 and  
4. Table 36-2 respectively. The proposed land use has been designed to promote the e conomic 
activities along Bellary Road, and major roads while residential use zone would promote wo rk 
live play concept. A large sports complex is proposed to be developed on existi ng 
Bettahalsuru quarry area. Also part of Regional Park proposed on Hennur Bande quarry (in  
Mittiganahalli village) is within Byappanahalli village.  
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
36-4 
Figure 36-2: PD 35 Proposed Land Use Map 
 
 
Table 36-2: PD 35 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 927.96 41.61 
Commercial 24.45 1.10 
Industrial 90.16 4.04 
Public & Semi Public 91.56 4.11 
Unclassified 428.61 19.22 
Public Utility 0.38 0.02 
Parks / Open Spaces 151.62 6.80 
Transport & Communication 250.00 11.21 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 1.99 0.09 
Water Bodies 64.68 2.90 
NGT Buffer 198.74 8.91 
Total Developable Area 2230.14 100.00 
Agriculture 1014.26 - 
Total PD Area 3244.26 - 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
36-5 
5. It is proposed that all master plan roads within Planning District be develo ped as per the 
proposed cross section for respective widths, as to ensure that footpaths and cycle tracks ar e 
developed during the road development. This shall help improve the accessibility within the 
planning district as this will facilitate movement of non-motorised transport.  
6. RMP2031 proposed city level public transport infrastructure like CRS, Metro and Mono Rail 
are running along roads within the Planning District. 
a. CRS: It is proposed that Bettahalasuru Railway Stations is developed to cater to 
passengers using CRS.  
b. Metro to Bengaluru International Airport: The Proposed metro to international 
airport runs along the Bellary Road and it is proposed to develop a station a t 
Bettahalasuru Cross on Bellary road.  
c. BMTC Bus Stations : It is proposed to develop 2 Bus Stations/ Terminal – a) 
Bettahalasuru Cross (Surhaunse), and b) Nelukunte Village 
7. The Transit Oriented Development Zone is proposed to be applicable around all met ro/ 
Mono Rail stations/ terminals/ interchanges within the planning district.  
8. A mini logistic hub is proposed to be developed near Bettahalasuru Railway station.  
9. Widening of Certain Roads/ Development of Flyover Overs/ Railway under Bridg e: The 
RMP2031 proposes upgration/ widening of certain roads and development of Flyovers/ 
Railway under Bridge/ pass, etc to be taken up within the planning district. The RMP20 31 
recommends that design of flyovers/ bridges  be done considering propose d Mono Rail 
system.  
10. The RMP2031 has identified 4 junctions for geometric improvements for better an d 
smoother traffic flows and to be taken up on priority, and particularly in Greenfield areas.  
11. In order to protect and conserve lakes and streams as well as avoid floodi ng in future as 
surface runoff increases due to urbanisation, the RMP2031 proposes that all lakes and 
streams be demarcated on ground within two years from notification of RMP203 1 and lake 
development plan  be prepared for all the lakes within the PD.  
12. As mentioned earlier, all these lakes are within PD fall in two different watersheds – a) 
Hebbala Watershed and b) outside BMA. The natural drainage system has been classified as 
following: 
a. Streams downstream of Gantigenahalli Kere and leading to Yelahanka Kere = 
Second ary 
b. All other streams leading to lakes and secondary streams = Tertiary 
13. The RMP2031 proposes that upgration of gramathans is undertaken in to provid e necessary 
infrastructure and facilities. It is also proposed that residential areas/ develpoments locate d 
on edge of Bettahalsuru Bande are redeveloped.  
14. To meet the future requirements, the RMP2031 proposes development of 1 no. of Fire 
Station, 1 no of 220kv Sub-station, 12 DWCCs, and 1 OWCCs, for solid waste  management 
within the planning district.   
15. Further, the RMP2031 proposes that 1 graveyard and 1 crematorium be developed within the 
earmarked open spaces at appropriate location within PD .  
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
36-6 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD 35 
 
1. Road Development Plan 
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Category - 1 
Roads and other master plan roads in phased manner.   
b. Widening/ Upgradation of Certain Roads: 
i. Development of existing roads as per RMP2031 Proposal 
ii. Railway under Bridge at Bettahalasuru (on Sir VNIT Road) 
iii. Railway under pass at NITTE Road  
iv. Widening of existing 18 M leading to BIAAPA 
v. Development of Existing Village Roads as per proposed Right of Way 
c. Junction Improvement Programme: 
 Bettahalasuru Cross   
 VIT Cross on Bellary Road 
 Hunsamaranhalli Junction 
 Intersections of existing roads 
 
2. Development of Public Transport System:  
a. Metro – Bengaluru International Airport 
b. BMTC Bus Station: 02 Locations  
3. Development of Multimodal Interchange Stations  
a. Bettahalsuru Cross  
4. Development of Parks and Open Spaces:  
a. Sports Complex at existing Bettahalasuru Bande 
b. Regional Park in Byappanahalli Village 
c. Other Park & Open Spaces as earmarked in PLU 
5. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes and Streams:  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Preparation of Lakes & Streams Rejuvenation Plan : 
i. RMP2031 Streams Rejuvenation Plan 
ii. Bettahalasuru Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
iii. Gantiganahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
iv. Byappanahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
v. Sathanuru Kere Rejuvenation Plan ,  
vi. Rejuvenation Plan for one unnamed kere in Sathanuru Revenue Village 
vii. Hunasamaranahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
viii. Rejuvenation Plan for one unnambed kere in Hunasamaranahalli revenue 
village,  
ix. Nallakunti Kere Rejuvenation Plan ,  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
36-7 
x. Sugatta Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
xi. Lakshmisagara Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
xii. Thimmasandra Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
xiii. Shinganayakanahalli Amanikere Rejuvenation Plan 
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Surrounding Area development plan to be prepared to upgrade the drainage and 
sewage infrastructure to stop flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as 
dumping of SWM.  
 
6. Upgradation of Villages/ Settlements :  
 Preparation of Village Upgradation Plan for all Gramathans,  
 Preparation of Redevelopment Plan for Settlements around Bettahalasuru Bande  
 
7. Development of Social and Physical Infrastructure/ Facilities: 
a) Fire Station:    01 Nos. 
b) Crematorium:     01 Nos. 
c) Graveyard:    01 Nos. 
d) 220kV Sub-Station:    01 Nos. 
e) SWM Dry Waste Collection Centre:   05 Nos. 
f) SWM Organic Waste Collection Centre:  01 Nos. 
 
8. Preparation of Water Supply and Sewage Network System Plan for PD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
37-1 
37. PD 36: KUMBALGODU SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT 
ZONE 
                                                                                                        Population (2011 Census): 23390 
                                                                                                        Area of PD: 2685.76 ha 
                                                                                                        Villages in PD: 12 
Gram Panchayats: Kumbalagodu, 
Ramohalli and Kumbalagodu Gollahalli 
Gross Density: 09 PPH 
Kumbalagodu Planning District ( PD No. 
36) is located in the south-western 
periphery within BMP along Mysuru 
road and it shares its boundary with 
BMICAPA. It is characterised by the 
presence of large tracts Kumbalagodu 
Industrial Area, several education 
institutions, scattered, plotted as well 
as high rise residential development 
and Vrushabhavati River.  
The RMP2031 proposes development 
of education oriented Special 
Development Zone in the planning 
district supported by public transport 
and recreational facilities.  
A. EXISTING SITUTATION 
1. Kumbalagodu Planning District admeasures 2685.76 Ha (26.85 sqkm) with 12 v illages from 
three different Gram Panchayats, namely – Kumbalagodu GP, Ramohalli GP and 
Kumbalagodu Gollahalli GP. Village within PD are Chellaghatta, Doddabele, Venkatapura, 
Kambipura, Kumbalagodu, Kanaminake, Thagachikuppi, Kumbalagodu, Gollahalli, Gudama va, 
Devageri, Gangasandra, and Vasanthanahalli. The Mysuru Road and Bengaluru - Mysuru 
Railway line run parallel to each other and run north south in the PD.  
2. Mysuru Road, NICE Road (outside PD on northern), Dodda Aladamara Road, Kumbala godu 
Gollahalli Road and Chellaghatta – Sulikere (via Archakara Badavane) Road are the few roads 
that define circulation pattern in PD.   
3. Kumbalagodu Industrial Area, individual industries, logistic faciltieis high er order educational 
insitutes and commercial establishments within the PD provide employment to thousands of 
people. Mysuru road is the backbone for all these developmental activities.PD i s 
predominantly agriculture in nature with scattered, plotted as well as high rise residential 
development. Entire PD area is within the watershed of Vrushabhavati River. 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
37-2 
4. Industrial activities are primarily concentrated in Kumbalagodu Industrial Estates  and few 
industries are located along Mysuru Road. Higher educational institutes like - Ch rist 
University along with its Engineering and Management Schools, Don Bosco Institute of 
Technology, Rajarajeshwari College of Engineering, Medical College, Apollo Naturopathy 
Hospital and Research Centre, Sri Dharmasthala Manjunatheshwara Ayurvedic College and 
Hospital, BGS Residential School, are present in PD. In addition, there are 32 schools for local 
residents., However, this is no higher order hospital with bed facility within the PD.  
5. As per Census 2011, PD has 32,239 inhabitants, which has increased by 106.35 % from 2001 
(15,623) and there are 14817 (45.96 %) resident workers. There are 8,109 household s (2011), 
with an average household size of 3.98, which is slightly lower than BMA (4.01 ). The gross 
density is 12 persons per hectare (pph), whereas the average residential density is 257.43 
pph. The gross density is highest in Kumbalagodu village (16 pph) and t he least in 
Vasanthanahalli village which is uninhabited. 
6. Kumbalagodu and Kambipura gramthanas have maximum residential development i n the 
form of village settlements, scattered residential plots/layouts and upcoming h igh rise 
appartments. BDA affordable housing scheme is under implementationin Kanaminake village.   
7. Agriculture is the predominant land use with Agriculture and allied activities being p erformed 
in 59.38% of the total PD area. It is followed by Vacant Land (15.06%) and Industri al Land Use 
(5%). There are scattered residential development areas in the form of village settlements,  
layouts and apartments (6.73%). Pubic & Semi Public accounts for 6.57%. Water bodies and 
streams account for 1.99% of the PD area. Transport/Communication Land Use accounts for 
3.83% of the PD area.  
8. The existing land use map and existing land use area statement is given in  Figure 37-1 and 
Table 37-1 respectively.  
9. The existing lake system flows into the Vrishabhavati River and then onto Byramangal a 
Reservoir, near Bidadi and finally joins the Cauvery River near Mekedattu, Kanakapura. The 
Devagiri Kere, Kumbalgodu Kere, two unnamed lakes in Kumbalgodu Revenue Vi llage, 
Kanamini kere, one unnamed lake in Kanamini revenue village, Kambipura kere, and three 
unnamed lakes in Kambipura revenue village. The PD has the one of the lowest elevati ons in 
BMA (about 628 to 650 mts).  
10. Water Supply is through Rural Development and Panchayat Raj Department, GoK. Mo st the 
developmental activities are dependent on ground water. There are no fire stations, burial  
ground/ crematorium/ cemeteries in PD. There is one BBMP operated SWM  Central 
Processing Unit at Kumbalagodu village.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
37-3 
Figure 37-1: PD 36 Existing Land Use Map 
 
Table 37-1: PD 36 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 181.39 6.74 
Commercial 21.21 0.79 
Industrial 134.79 5.01 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 175.52 6.52 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 4.64 0.17 
Parks & Open Spaces 28.40 1.06 
Transport Communication 103.38 3.84 
Vacant 396.88 14.74 
Agriculture 1591.86 59.14 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 34.70 1.29 
Water Bodies 18.95 0.70 
Total 2691.72 100.00 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
37-4 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT ZONE WITH PLANNED HIGH DENSITY 
GROWTH AND ENABLING ECONOMIC GROWTH, INTEGRATION OF CITY CIRCULATION 
NETWORK, AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION. 
PROPOSALS 
1. PD is witnessing road based development and is now also extending beyond mysuru road and 
is seeing scattered development pattern. It becomes imperative that RMP2031 dire cts for 
planned urban development and promotion of economic growth along prop osed major Ring 
and Radials.  
2. RMP2031 proposes development of various economic nodes/ special develop ment zones 
across BMA and PD Kumbalagodu is one of these nodes/ zones proposed to be dev eloped . 
The guiding principles for developing PD as Special Development Zone is as following : 
a. Promotion of Economic Growth along Radials Road (Consolidating Ind ustrial Areas 
and Promoting Educational and Healthcare uses) 
b. Development of Grid Pattern Circulation System allowing higher FAR consumption  
c. Promotion of Transit Oriented Development around Metro  Stations  
d. Protection and Conservation of Lake System and Vrushabhavati River 
e. Planned Open & Open Spaces and Recreational Spaces 
3. The Planning District has been designated as Special Development Zone and  be g overned by 
special regulations as stipulated in Zoning Regulations.  
4. Further, for the villages outside conurbation, the RMP2031 proposes to guide the  village 
development and improved connectivity such that there is a wholesome appro ach to 
infrastructure upgradation. Hence, it is proposed to prepare Village Development Plan 
comprising of Infrastructure Development within Gramathana, development of Gramathana 
peripheral road, development of village roads (to improve accessibility), la ke rejuvenation 
and lake area development, development of Bus Stations, development of SWM faciliti es, 
etc.  
5. The Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use Distribution for the PD ar e depicted in 
Figure 2 and Figure 3 respectively. The proposed land use has been designed to promote the 
economic activities along PRR, Mysuru Road and major roads while residential use zon e 
would promote work live play concept. Roads of 24m, 18m and 15m ha ve been proposed to 
improve the circulation and promote the proposed Public Semi-Public area. The Proposed 
Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use Distribution for the PD are depicted i n Figure 37-2 and 
Table 37-2 respectively.   
6. The RMP2031 proposes large Public – Semi- Public pocket at the south of the PD and along 
the Mysore Road contiguous to the Christ University. The intent is to dev elop a Hospital, 
Sports Complex and for other educations institutions of schools and colleges. A PD  level large 
Park and open space is proposed along and to the south of Kumbalgodu Lake which  is to be 
developed for providing recreational facilities to residents and industrial workers. 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
37-5 
Figure 37-2: PD 36 Proposed Land Use Map 
 
Table 37-2: PD 36 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 913.96 41.50 
Commercial 18.92 0.86 
Industrial 200.25 9.09 
Public & Semi Public 311.99 14.17 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 5.75 0.26 
Parks / Open Spaces 103.06 4.68 
Transport & Communication 320.89 14.57 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 24.72 1.12 
Water Bodies 13.72 0.62 
NGT Buffer 289.01 13.12 
Total Developable Area 2202.28 100.00 
Agriculture 489.44 - 
Total PD Area 2691.72 - 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
37-6 
7. To improve the public transport facility it is proposed to extend the Metro  Rail alignment 
along the Mysuru road till Kanmanike. It is suggested to extend the metro till Bidadi. It is 
proposed to develop interchange at NICE Junction where PRR Metro meets. My suru Road 
Metro. Subsequently, stations are proposed to be developed at a) Rajarajeshwari College of 
Engineering, b ) Anchepalaya, c) Ramohalli Cross, d) Kumbalagodu, e) Kumbalagodu Industrial 
Estate, f) Kaniminike and g) terminal at ISBT proposed at the BMA Boundary.  
8. The RMP2031 proposes to develop ISBT cum Depot at Kanminke Village at BMA Boundary,  
and BMTC bus stations at Challaghatta village (along the proposed 18m ma ster plan road ) 
and Devagere Village.  
9. Connectivity Improvement between Mysore Road to Magadi Road New Li nks: RMP2031 
proposes a 30 m wide new road connecting Magadi road to Mysururoad, running parallel to 
the PRR. It passes through villages of Ramohalli, Malagondanahalli, Maragond anahalli, 
Sulikere and Kenchanapura, Kumbalagodu, Yellachaguppe, Channenahalli. 
10. The RMP2031 proposes development/ upgradation of all existing roads as per RMP2 031 
proposed right of way and typical cross section. A Gramathana periphery road is pro posed to 
be developed for Thagachakuppe and Devagere.  
11. To mitigate provide comfort to pedestrians and NMT facilities and improve street aesthetics, 
the RMP2031 proposes road side and avenue plantation for all master  plan roads and village 
roads as indicated in the proposed land use plan for the Planning District.  
12. RMP2031 has identified junctions for geometric design improvement and upgradation of 
junction infrastructure. They include a) Intersection of Mysuru Road and Kumbala godu 
Gollahalli Road, b) Ramohalli Cross (it is proposed to develop a Trumpet  Flyover or bi 
directional Flyover at this Junction), c) Jagadale Factory Junction, d) Anchepalya J unction 
(road leading to Kambipura), e) Basava Nagar Junction, f) intersection of Kumbal agodu 
Gollahalli Road and Devagere Road, and g) Subbarayappanapalya Cross .  
13. The RMP2031 also proposes development of Rail under Bridge at two level crossin gs, namely 
on Dadda Aladamara Road, Challeghatta Railway Gate and proposed road crossing Railway 
Line.  
14. The Natural drainage within PD has been classified as following: 
a. Vrushabhavati River = Primary  
b. The streams from Ramohalli Kere till Vrushabhavati River = Secondary ,  
c. The streams from Bheemanakuppe Kere till Vrushabhavati River = Secondary,  
d. Otheƌ stƌeaŵs leadiŶg to otheƌ keƌe͛s aŶd fƌoŵ otheƌ keƌe͛s to seĐoŶdaƌǇ keƌe = 
Tertiary. 
15. The RMP2031 aims at the protection and conservation of the Vrishabhavathi rive r, streams 
and all lakes within the PD. Therefore it is proposed that a Lake and Stream Rejuvenation and  
Lake Surrounding Area Plan be prepared and implemented .   
16. The RMP2031 proposes to develop a Dry Waste Collection Centre in each vi llage, hence 12 
DWCCs along with 2 OWCC, and 1 BMU are proposed to be developed within PD by Gram 
Panchayats. Also, one STP and one ISP are proposed to be developed by BWSSB.  
17. The RMP2031 proposes development of Sports Complex, Fire Statoin and one c rematorium 
within the Planning district.  
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
37-7 
Programmes and Projects 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD36: 
1. Road Development Plan:  
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Category - 1 
Roads: 
i. Peripheral Ring Road 
ii. Proposed 30m wide Road from Mysuru Road to Magadi Road 
iii. Dodda Aladamara Road (widening) 
iv. Kumbalagodu Gollahalli Road (widening) 
v. New Master Plan Roads 
b. Development of Village Roads as per RMP 2031 proposals  
c. Development of Railway Under Bridge 
i. Near BDA Housing Scheme (at Kanmineke) 
ii. Railway Gate on Dodda Aladamara Road 
iii. Challeghatta Railway Gate 
iv. All proposed Master Plan Roads 
d. Junction Improvement Programme: 
i. Intersection of Mysuru Road and Kumbalagodu Gollahalli Road,  
ii. Ramohalli Cross (it is proposed to develop a Trumpet Flyover or bi directional 
Flyover at this Junction),  
iii. Jagadale Factory Junction,  
iv. Anchepalya Junction (intersection of Mysuru road and road to Kambipura),  
v. Basava Nagar Junction,  
vi. intersection of Kumbalagodu Gollahalli Road and Devagere Road,  
vii. Subbarayappanapalya Cross  
viii. Intersection of Existing and New Links 
 
2. Development of Public Transport System:  
a. Namma Metro:  
i. Mysuru Road: Extension of Mysuru Road Metro till Kanmanike Proposed ISBT  
ii. Metro PRR: Along NICE Corridor  
b. ISBT cum Depot:      Kanmanike Village  
c. BMTC Bus Stations:      1) Chellaghatta Village 
        2) Devagere Village 
 
3. Village Development Plan: It is proposed that Gram Panchayat prepares Village Development 
Plans for each village within Planning District for implementation of Master Plan propo sals.  
 
4. Development of Parks and Open Spaces 
a. Sport Complex (Kanmanike Village) 
b. Regiona Park (Kanmanike Village) 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
37-8 
5. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes  and Streams :  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Preparation of Rejuvenation Plan for Lakes & Streams :  
i. RMP2031 Streams Rejuvenation Plan 
ii. Devagiri Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
iii. Kumbalgodu Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
iv. Rejuvenation Plan for two unnamed lakes in Kumbalgodu Revenue Village,  
v. Kanamini kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
vi. Rejuvenation Plan one unnamed lake in Kanamini revenue village,  
vii. Kambipura kere Rejuvenation Plan ,  
viii. Rejuvenation Plan for three unnamed lakes in Kambipura revenue village. 
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Area development plan be prepared.  
 
6. Development of Social and Physical Infrastructure/ Facilities: 
a) Fire Station:    01 Nos. (Kumbalagodu Village)  
b) Crematorium:     01 Nos. 
c) Graveyard/ Burial Ground:   01 Nos. 
d) SWM Dry Waste Collection Centre:   09Nos. 
e) SWM Organic Waste Collection Centre:  02 Nos. 
f) Bio-methanation Unit:    01 Nos. 
g) BWSSB Proposed STP:    01 Nos. 
h) BWSSB Proposed ISP:    01 Nos.  
i) WTP, OHT, GLSR and STP   to be decided based on Water Supply & 
Sewage Network Plan 
7. Preparation of Water Supply and Sewarage Supply Network System 
 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
38-9 
38. PD 37: DODDA ALADA MARA  
 
A. EXISTING STATUS 
1. The PD admeasures 1375.25 Ha (13.75 sqkm) and falls within Chunchanakuppe Gram 
Panchayat of Kengeri Hobli. It comprises of 10 villages, namely - Chikk eluru Venkatapura, 
Chikkeluru, Kethavalli Narasipura, Kethohalli, Kethohalli Ramapura, Koluru, Kolur a 
Nanjundapura, Kolura Gurayapura, Sheshagiripura, and Chikkeluru Ramapura.  
2. PD being located on south – western croner of the LPA boundary, shares the boundary with 
Magadi Local Planning Area. The areas adjoining to PD but inside Magadi  LPA have opended 
up areas for urbanization by Magadi Master Plan and are witnessing large scale plotted  
developments which are still to be occupied. Further, ISRO has developed an Indian Deep 
Space Network centre in Sulivara, which is just 3km away for LPA of BDA. However, despite 
the fact that several plotted residential layouts has come up in LPA of Magadi, the PD has 
retained its agriculture charactertics.  
3. The Big Banyan Tree or the Dodda Aladamara, which is a 400 year old Banyan tree and is 
located in Kethohalli village. The Kumbalgodu State Forest defines certain sections of the 
southern boundary of PD.  
4. Dadda Aladmara Road and Hejjalla - Kempadyapanahalli both emanating from My suru Road, 
Kolur- Byalalu Road and Kothehalli – Hejjala Road define the existing connectivity within the 
Planning District. 
5. The planning district is characterized by predominantly agriculture landscape (Agriculture 
land use accounts for 86% of PD area), presence of few scattered unoccupied residential  
Population (2011 Census): 4708 
Area of PD: 1375.25 ha 
Villages in PD: 10 
Gram Panchayats: Chunchanakuppe 
Gross Density: 04 pph 
The Dodda Aladamara Planning District 
(PD NO.37) is located on the South-
Western corner of BMA and shares the 
boundary with Magadi Local Planning 
Area. The Dadda Aladmara or the Big 
Banyan Tree – an important natural 
heritage is located in PD. Kumbalgodu 
Forest abuts the PD on southern side, 
whereas mining/ quarrying activities are 
happening on western side. The PD is 
predominantly agriculture in nature with 
village settlements and few residential 
pockets. 
 
The RMP2031 proposes to retain entire 
PD as an agricultural zone with focus on 
heritage conservation and improved 
connectivity.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
38-10 
layouts and minning/ quarrying activities. The residential area accounts for mere 2. 5% of PD 
area, which are mostly Gramathan areas. Figure 38-1 and Table 38-1 presents the existing 
land use map and existing land use area statement for PD respectively. 
Figure 38-1: PD 37 Existing Land Use Map 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
38-11 
Table 38-1: PD 37 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 32.20 2.34 
Commercial 1.26 0.09 
Industrial 5.66 0.41 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 15.88 1.15 
Public Semi Public 5.66 0.41 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 0.14 0.01 
Parks & Open Spaces 1.06 0.08 
Transport Communication 26.59 1.93 
Vacant 75.36 5.48 
Agriculture 1176.66 85.56 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 4.84 0.35 
Water Bodies 29.02 2.11 
Total 1375.25 100.00 
 
6. As per Census 2011, PD has 4,708 inhabitants, with a decadal growth rate of 2 9.33% (2001-
2011). In 2011, there were 2,051 resident workers, thus the work force participation rate is 
43.55%. There are 1110 households (2011), with Avg. Household size comes to  4.24, which is 
higher than BMA (4.01). The gross density is 3.5 persons per hectare (pph), whereas the 
average residential density is 149 pph.  
7. Chikkeluru and Kethohalli are the two gramthanas of comparatively larger size. There are 
residential areas and village settlements that are sparsely populated.  
8. Dodda Aladamara is tourist attraction place, and has some commercial establishment 
provding supporting commercial activities. In addition, within agriculture zo ne, Milk 
producing centres, brick kilns, concrete block making, quarrying and polymer factory are 
some of industrial activities within the PD. There are several farms and nurserys within the 
PD.  
9. Water Supply is ground water dependent and is done by Rural Development a nd Panchayat 
Raj Department, GoK. Being village settlements, there is no sewage network. There is a need 
for providing proper sanitation waste management facilities within the gramathans.  
10. There are around 24 schools located in this PD. However for healthcare, the population is 
dependent on adjoining PD and city health facilities. A Green Village Turf Cricket Ground is 
located in Kolur Gururayanapura .  
11. There are six lakes, two in Kethohalli (one abutting Dodda Aladamara Road and other near 
Kethohalli – Koluru Road), Chikkeluru Kere, Koluru Kere, Lakkayyanapalya Kere and Kethohall i 
Narasipura Lake within the planning district. All these lakes and PD area drain i nto 
Vrishabhavathi River .  
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
38-12 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: PRESERVATION, GRAMATHANA DEVELOPMENT, IMPROVED 
CONNECTIVITY.  
PROPOSALS 
1. The RMP2031 proposes preservation and maintiaing the Agriculture zone for en tire PD while 
allowing natural growth, gramathana development and connectivity improvement.  
2. The RMP2031 proposes to guide the village development and improved con nectivity such 
that there is a wholesome approach to infrastructure upgradation. The focus is on villag e 
development and hence it is proposed to prepare Village Development Plan comprisi ng of 
Infrastructure Development within Gramathana, development of Gramathana peripheral 
road, development of village roads (to improve accessibility), lake rejuvenation, dev elopment 
of Bus Stations, development of SWM facilities, etc. Figure 38-2 and Table 38-2 represent the 
Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use area statement for Planning District.  
Figure 38-2: PD 37 Proposed Land Use Map  
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
38-13 
Table 38-2: PD 37 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 0.00 0.00 
Commercial 0.00 0.00 
Industrial 0.00 0.00 
Public & Semi Public 0.00 0.00 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 0.07 0.07 
Parks / Open Spaces 0.00 0.00 
Transport & Communication 0.00 0.00 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 0.00 0.00 
Water Bodies 0.00 0.00 
NGT Buffer 0.00 0.00 
Total Developable Area 0.00 00.00 
Agriculture 1375.25 - 
Total PD Area 1375.25 - 
 
3. To improve the public transport facility it is proposed to develop BMTC Bus Stati on cum Bus 
Depot at Kethohalli (adjacent to Nesarga Polymers) and Bus Stations in Kolur .  
4. At city level a road connecting Mysuru Road (Kumbalgodu Industrial Area) and Magadi Road 
(Channenahalli) is proposed and it passess through the PD (north eastern corner). Further, to 
improve the connectivity within the PD, it is proposed that the Dodda Aladamara road to be 
widened to 30m wide (except for a stretch 50m on either side of Dodda Aladamara Tr ee) and 
all village roads.  
5. The agriculture landscape allow slow run off of rain water when compared to highligh t 
urbanised areas, at the same time, agriculture landscape provides an opportunity to p rotect 
and develop the natural drainage and lakes for future. The RMP2031, therefore proposes the 
protection and conservation of Kethohalli (one abutting Dodda Aladam ara Road and other 
near Kethohalli – Koluru Road), Chikkeluru Kere, Koluru Kere, Lakkayyanapalya Kere and 
Kethohalli Narasipura Lake as well as natural streams. Thus, a Lake Rejuvenation plan  be  
prepared and implemented. The streams from Ramohalli Kere till Vrushabhavati River is 
classified as Seconda ry, ǁheƌeas otheƌ stƌeaŵs leadiŶg to otheƌ keƌe͛s aŶd fƌoŵ otheƌ keƌe͛s 
to secondary kere are classified as Tertiary.  
6. On infrastructure side, the RMP2031 proposes 2 Dry Waste Collection Centre in the villages 
of Kethohalli and Koluru Guryapura and 1 Integrated Waste Processing Plant in Ko luru Village 
on the existing mining/ quarry areas. Further, the RMP2031 proposes that 1 bu rial and 
cremation ground be developed within the PD at appropriate location as id entified by Gram 
Panchayat. 
7. To provide comfort to pedestrians and cyclists, the RMP2031 proposes road side and avenue 
plantation for all master plan roads and village roads as indicated in the pr oposed land use 
plan for the Planning District.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
38-14 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD31: 
 
1. Village Development Plan .  
2. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes  and Streams :  
d. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification of 
the RMP2031 .  
e. Rejuvenation of Lakes & Streams : It is proposed that a detailed Lake and Stream 
Rejuvenation Plan be prepared for all lakes within the PD .  
f. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Area development plan be prepared.  
3. Road Development Plan:  
e. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Category - 1 
Roads: 
 Proposed Road from Mysuru Road to Magadi Road 
 Dodda Aladamara Road 
f. Development of Village Roads 
 Kolur- Byalalu Road  
 Kothehalli – Hejjala Road  
 Kothehalli – Kolur Road 
 New Village Road Links (15m) 
 New Village Road Links (12m) 
 Gramathana Periphery Roads  
g. Junction Improvement Programme: 
 Kethohalli Junction  
 LK Shivakumar Circle 
 Intersection of Existing and New Links 
4. Development of Public Transport System:  
a. Bus Station cum Depot: One at Kethohalli Village  
b. BMTC Bus Stations:  one at Kolur Village 
5. Development of Social and Physical Infrastructure/ Facilities: 
j) Crematorium:     01 Nos. 
k) Graveyard:    01 Nos. 
l) SWM Dry Waste Collection Centre:   02Nos. 
m) SWM Organic Waste Collection Centre:  01 Nos. 
n) Integrated Waste Processing Unit:  01 Nos. 
o) WTP, OHT, GLSR and STP   to be decided based on Water Supply & 
Sewage Network Plan 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
39-1 
39. PD 38: SULIKERI - BHEEMANAKUPPE 
 
A. EXISTING STATUS 
1. The PD admeasures 3209.49 ha (32.09 sq.km.) and falls under the Kengeri Hobli. It co mprises 
of 11 villages - Ramasandra, Kenchanapura, Soolikeri, Maaragondanahalli Krishnasagara, 
Maaragondanahalli, Maligowdanahalli, Ramohalli, Bheemanakuppe Ramasagara, 
Bheemanakuppe, Kommagatta, and Kommagatta Krishnasagara. These villages are fall within 
two Gram Panchayats, namely - Ramohalli and Sulikere. It may be noted that Ramasand ra 
and Kommaghatta villages partly under the Jurisdiction of LPA of BDA and LPA of BMICAPA.  
2. The PD is presently witnessing the transition from agriculture landscape to urban with the 
implementation of large BDA Sir Nadaprabhu Kempegowda Layout scheme. In ad dition, the 
presence of large lakes like – Ramohalli kere, Bheemanakuppe kere, Sulikere, 
Maragondanahalli Krishnasagara kere, the Sulikere forest, large village settlement like – 
Ramohalli, scattered and unorganised plotted developments, spotted quarrying, agricu lture 
fields define the characteristics of PD. 
3. Ramohalli is the largest Gramthana followed by Ramasandra (part in BMICAPA). The BDA 
Scheme is being implemented in Ramasandra, Kenchanapura, Kommagatta, and Kommagatta 
Krishnasagara which are located along the NICE Ring Road .  
4. Dodda Aladmara Road, Taverkere – Kengari Road, Kommagatta Road and Bettanapalya – 
Ramohalli road, are the four main roads along with village road define the present circulation 
pattern while NICE Peripheral Ring Road abuts the planning district on eastern side. There is  
no BMTC Station/ depot in this part of BMA.  
Population (2011 Census): 20,016 
Area of PD: 3209.5 ha 
Villages in PD: 11 
Gram Panchayats: Sulikere and Ramohalli 
Gross Density: 06 pph 
Sulikeri - Bheemanakuppe Planning 
District ( PD No.38) is located on Western 
side in BMA and shares its boundary with 
LPA of BMICAPA on East and LPA of 
Magadi Planning Authority on west. The 
PD is characterised by the presence of 
large lakes, the Sulikere forest the 
upcoming BDA Shri Nadaprabhu 
Kempowda Layout and agriculture land 
use.  
The Master Plan has adopted the RMP 
2015 proposals as growth as envisaged is 
yet to happen, thus retaining the RMP 
2015 conurbation and rest of the area as 
agriculture zone and aiming at 
Environmental Protection. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
39-2 
5. The development of BDA Scheme will ensure that additional population is accomm odated 
without adding additional areas for urbanisation. Future population residing in BDA Scheme 
area is located to the west of the NICE ring road are well connected with BBMP.  
6. As per Census 2011, PD has 20,016 inhabitants, with a decadal growth rate of  69.60% (2001-
2011) and there are 39.8% resident workers. There are 4,800 households (2011), with Avg.  
Household size being 4.17, which is higher than BMA (4.01). The gross densi ty is 6 persons 
per hectare (pph), whereas the average residential density is 215 pph. The gross density is 
highest in Ramohalli Village (9 pph) and the least in Bheemanakuppe Ramasa gara which is 
uninhabited.  
7. The brick kilns, concrete block making, saw mill, milk production are the  major economic 
activities along with some educational institutes located in PD.  
12. Agriculture land use is predominant land use with agriculture and allied activities being 
performed in ~63.22% of the total PD area. It is followed by Vacant Land with upcoming 
residential areas (17.29%), Forest (Soolikere Reserved Forest) and Water bodies & Streams 
accounting for 6.66% and 5.26% of PD area respectively. Residential Land Use and Transport 
and Communication Land Use accounts for 3.04% and 0.19% respectively in PD area. Figure 
39-1 and Table 39-1 presents the existing land use map and existing land use area statement 
for PD respectively. 
Figure 39-1: PD 38 Existing Land Use Map   
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
39-3 
Table 39-1: PD 38 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 97.71 3.04 
Commercial 6.19 0.19 
Industrial 28.77 0.90 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 7.07 0.22 
Public Semi Public 32.75 1.02 
Pubic & Semi Public - Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 0.18 0.01 
Parks & Open Spaces 10.97 0.34 
Transport Communication 66.96 2.09 
Vacant 549.54 17.12 
Agriculture 2025.11 63.10 
Forest 213.78 6.66 
Streams 8.74 0.27 
Water Bodies 161.72 5.04 
    0.00 
Total 3209.49 100.00 
 
8. Water Supply is through Rural Development and Panchayat Raj Department, GoK. Mo st the 
developmental activities are dependent on ground water. As per Rural Development and 
Panchayat Raj Department, there 13 Government schools present in the PD.  
9. Sulikere – Bheemanakuppe PD area drains into Vrishabhavathi River. Ramohalli Lake, 
Bheemanakuppe Lake (spread into three different villages), Hoskere Lake (Maragondanah alli 
Krishnasagara Kere), Sulikere Lake, Kenchanapura Lake, Two water bodies/ lakes in 
Kammaghatta village, two water bodies/ lakes in Kammaghatta Krishnasagara village, two 
water bodies/ lakes in Maligondanahalli village, One water body/ lake each in 
Bheemanakuppe Village, Soolikere Village and Maragondanhalli village are the lakes / water 
bodies present within the Planning District calling for protection from future developments.  
10. Soolikere Reserved Forest is the major open space in agriculture landscape. Provi sion of 
adequate parks, playground and open spaces for future population need to be pl anned while 
protecting the lake and valley system is imperative.  
 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: PRESERVATION AND CONSOLIDATION, IMPROVED 
CONNECTIVITY, AND PROTECTION OF LAKES & STREAMS   
PROPOSALS 
1. The Planning District falls under two planning zones of RMP2031 – Planning Zone B 
(Consolidation) and Planning Zone C (Agricultural Zone). Hence the governi ng principles for 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
39-4 
the proposals for this PD are derived from both the concepts. The governing princip le for this 
PD are as following: 
a. Promotion of Planned Developed in BDA Scheme Area and thereby further 
densification  
b. Protection and Conservation of Lake System and Flood Protection 
c. Preservation of the Agriculture land use 
2. The RMP2031 proposes no further extension of urbanisable area and thus has limited the 
conurbation area to present extents for development activities on eastern side whil st the 
western part of the PD is proposed to continue as the Agriculture land use.  
3. The RMP2031 proposes to guide the village development and improved con nectivity such 
that there is a wholesome approach to infrastructure upgradation and livability. The f ocus is 
on village development and hence it is proposed to prepare Village Devel opment Plan 
comprising of Infrastructure Development within Gramathana, development of Gramathana 
peripheral road, development of village roads (to improve accessibility), la ke rejuvenation 
and lake area development, development of Bus Stations, development of SWM faciliti es, 
etc.  
4. The Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use Distribution for the PD ar e depicted in 
Figure 39-2 and Table 39-2 respectively.  
Figure 39-2: PD 38 Proposed Land Use Map 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
39-1 
Table 39-2: PD 38 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 1150.73 63.80 
Commercial 18.47 1.02 
Industrial   0.00 
Public & Semi Public 46.21 2.56 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 0.39 0.02 
Parks / Open Spaces 59.88 3.32 
Transport & Communication 226.72 12.57 
Forest 17.08 0.95 
Streams 2.76 0.15 
Water Bodies 60.58 3.36 
NGT Buffer 220.89 12.25 
Total Developable Area 1803.70 100.00 
Agriculture 1405.79 - 
Total PD Area 3209.49 - 
 
5. RMP2031 proposes city level metro network which include Metro PRR, thoug h outside the 
PD and in BMICAPA it is proposed to develop metro stations at in tersection of existing roads 
for ease of passenger movement. Locations of stations  be finalized during feasibility  and DPR 
stage. Further, RMP2031 proposes new road connecting Mysuru Road and Magadi  Road that  
cater to the connectivity between the south, south-west and west of the LPA and additionally 
catering to the upcoming dense development in Kempegowda Layout located in this PD. It is 
proposed that the road  be designed to accommodate BRTS in future if required.  
6. In order to improve last mile connectivity and extend the public transport sy stem to 
neighborhood level it is proposed to develop one BMTC Bus Termi nal / Depot is proposed on 
Ramohalli along the new 30 m wide road connecting between Bettanapalya- Ramohalli and 
at the other Bus Terminus / Depot at Sulikere along the 100m wide PRR/Road between 
Mysore Road to Magadi Road. 
7. Peripheral Ring Road, Dodda Aladamara Road, Tavarakere – Kengeri road, Bettanpalya-
Ramohalli road, Sulikere main road, have been designated as Arterial Roads. 
8. The RMP2031 proposes upgradation of Master Plan Roads to improve their serv ice levels of 
these roads. Upgradation shall include development of road as per defined cross secti on, 
providing underground services (water supply, sewage, drainage, telecommun ication cables, 
electric cables upto 220kv, etc), Junction Improvements (including provid ing traffic signals), 
Flyovers, Bus Bay/ Shelter, cycle tracks, footpath, etc).  
9. As mentioned earlier, PD area drains in Vrushabhavati River. The natural drainage has been 
classified as following: 
a. Drainage down stream of Kannelli connecting to Vrushabhavati River (via Sulikere)  = 
Secondary  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
39-2 
b. Drainage downstream of Yalachaguppe kere connecting Hosakere (Maragondanahalli 
Krishnasagara Kere) leading to Bhimanakuppe and further to Vrushabhavati River = 
Secondary.  
c. Drainage downstream of Ramohalli Kere and Lakkanpalaya Kere and meets at point 
from there to Vrushabhavati River = Secondary  
d. All other drainages leading to lakes and secondary streams (as shown in PLU Map) = 
Tertiary 
10. The RMP2031 proposes the protection and conservation of Ramohalli Lake, Bheemanakuppe 
Lake (spread into three different villages), Hoskere Lake, Soolikere Lake, and their natural 
streams. It is therefore proposed that a Lake Rejuvenation and lake surrounding area be 
prepared.  
11. In order to cater to present and future infrastructure requirements, the RMP2031 proposes 
one 220kv power sub-station, and 9 DWCCs within Conurbation area and 2 in villages of 
Ramohalli and Sulikere for solid waste management within the planning district. The 
RMP2031 also proposes 1 burial ground and 1 cremation ground  at suitbable location within 
the PD.  
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD 38 Sulikere – Bheemanakuppe: 
 
1. Road development Plan:  
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Catego ry -1 
Roads (as listed in Annexure) and other roads in phased manner.   
b. Development of new links connectivity:   
i. 30 m wide new road connecting Magadi road to Mysore road  
ii. 30m new road connecting from Bettanapalya Ramohalli Road to PRR 
iii. 30 m wide new road connecting the village of Bheemanakuppe Ramasagara 
and PRR. 
iv. 24m wide new road connecting from Tavelkere - Kengeri Road to Sulikere 
Main Road  
v. 24 m wide new road connecting from Tavelkere - Kengeri Road to Ittege 
factory bus stop. 
vi. 18 m wide new road connecting PRR to Hoskere lake. 
c. Upgradation of Master Plan Roads  
i. Dodda Aladamara Road,  
ii. Tavarakere – Kengeri road,  
iii. Bettanpalya-Ramohalli road,  
iv. Sulikere main road 
d. Development of Gramathana Periphery Roads and Village Roads: 
i. Malagondanahalli village periphery road  
ii. Existing Village Roads 
e. Geometric Improvement of Existing Junctions 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
39-3 
2. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes  and Streams :  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification  of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Rejuvenation of Lakes & Streams  
i. RMP2031 Streams Rejuvenation Plan 
ii. Bheemanakuppe Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
iii. Ramohalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
iv. Maaragondanahalli Krishnasagara (Hosakere) Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
v. Sulikere Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
vi. Rejuvenation Plan for two Lakes in Bheemanakuppe Revenue Village 
vii. Rejuvenation Plan for two Lakes in Kommaghatta Krishnasagara Revenue 
Village 
viii. Kommaghatta Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
ix. Rejuvenation Plan for one Lake in Sulikere Revenue Village 
x. Kenchanapura Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
xi. Rejuvenation Plan for two Lakes in Maragondanahalli Revenue Village 
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Surrounding Area development plan be prepared to upgrade the drainage and 
sewage infrastructure to stop flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as 
dumping of SWM.  
3. Development of Physical and Social Infrastructure/ Facilities: 
a) Crematorium:     01 Nos. 
b) Graveyard:    01 Nos. 
c) SWM Dry Waste Collection Centre:   11 Nos. 
d) SWM Organic Waste Collection Centre:  02 Nos. 
e) Bio-Methanation Unit:    01 Nos. 
f) WTP, OHT, GLSR and STP   to be decided based on Water Supply & 
Sewage Network Plan 
g) Fire Station:    01 Nos.  
h) Playgrounds:    02 Nos. 
i) Sports Complex     01 Nos.  
 
4. Preparation of Water Supply and Sewage Network Plan for Conurbation Ar eas  
 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
40-1 
40. PD 39: SHEEGEHALLI – YELACHAGUPPE  
 
A. EXISTING STATUS 
1. Sheegehalli- Yelachaguppe PD admeasures 1733.21 ha (17.33 sqkm) and fall s within the 
Taverkere and Yeshwanthapur Hobli. It comprises of 7 villages, namely – Kannelli, 
Sheegehalli, Channenahalli, Yalachaguppe Ramapura, Yalachaguppe, Kodagihalli and 
Manganahalli. Village Kodagihalli and Manganahalli are partly in LPA o f BDA and partly in LPA 
of BMICAPA.  
2. Machohalli Industrial Area, Kamath Industrial Layout along Magadi Road in PD  40 (north of 
PD 39), Srinidhi Industrial Estate, Nanjappa Industrial Estate in Sheegehalli, scatt ered 
industrial units, the upcoming BDA Scheme Sir Nada Prabhu Kempegowda Layout, unp lanned 
plotted developments along Magadi Road, NICE corridor (in Kodagihalli), and along existing 
village roads, Jana Seva Vidhya Kendra, BBMP SWM Processing Units and BMTC Depot an d 
breached agriculture lands defines the characteristics of planning district. Managanhalli 
(partly in BMICAPA) and Chenenahalli and Sheegehalli for being located along the NICE 
Peripheral Ring Road and Magadi Road are seeing many upcoming plotted resi dential 
developments. Given the land already developed and the existing plotted developments are 
expected to accommodate more population in future.  
3. Magadi Road, NICE Road, Sheegehalli Main Road, Kenchanapura Road, Kodagih alli Main 
Road, Taverkere – Kengari Road, Pipeline Road and existing village roads define the 
circulation network for the PD. 
4. As per Census 2011, PD has 17,013 inhabitants, with a decadal rate of 145% (2001-201 1) and 
there are 42.2% resident workers. There are 4,031 households (2011), with Avg. Hous ehold 
Population (2011 Census): 17,013 
Area of PD: 1733.21 ha 
Villages in PD: 7 
Gram Panchayats: Kodagihalli and 
Tavarakere  
Gross Density: 10 pph 
Sheegehalli- Yelachaguppe Planning 
District (PD. No.39) is located Western 
side in BMA with Magadi Road passing 
through its north western side and 
running northof the PD. It shares its 
boundary with LPA of BMICAPA on 
eastern side and LPA of Magadi on 
western side. BDA Scheme Layout, 
unorganised and scattered developments 
all along Magadi Road, & NICE corroridor 
and reducing agriculuture use defines the 
charateristics of PD.  
 
RMP2031 proposes to promote planned 
high density planned development, while 
retaining certain areas as agriculture.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
40-2 
size being 4.22, which is higher than BMA (4.01). The gross density is 10 person s per hectare 
(pph), whereas the average residential density is 176 pph.  
5. Agriculture land use accounts for 61% of the total PD area, followed by vacant land  use 
accounting for 22.9%. The residential areas are basically Gramathans and plotted 
development accounting for 4.84% of total area, whereas industrial use accounts for 2.9 7% 
of total area. Figure 40-1 and Table 40-1  presents the Existing Land Use Map and Existing 
Land Use area statement respectively.  
6. Water Supply is through Rural Development and Panchayat Raj Department, GoK. Mo st the 
developmental activities are dependent on ground water. There are two big Solid Waste  
Management Facilities located within the PD.  
7. As per Rural Development and Panchayat Raj Department, there are 24 Government schools 
in Gram panchayats falling within this PD. Private educational institutes like Jan a Seva Vidya 
Kendra are also present in the area. However there are certain pockets which do not have 
access to primary schools within 1 km radius. There is a gap in healthcare infrastructure, and 
the nearest hospitals are in the neighbouring planning districts, along Magadi  road, and 
Mysuru Road.  
Figure 40-1: PD 39 Existing Land Use Map  
 
 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
40-3 
Table 40-1: PD 39 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 83.93 4.84 
Commercial 7.53 0.43 
Industrial 51.40 2.97 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 29.58 1.71 
Pubic & Semi Public - Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 3.69 0.21 
Parks & Open Spaces 3.76 0.22 
Transport Communication 52.12 3.01 
Vacant 393.30 22.69 
Agriculture 1057.62 61.02 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 3.75 0.22 
Water Bodies 46.53 2.68 
Total 1733.21 100.00 
 
8. While there is no playground within the PD, there is one big playground in Tavarke re e 
9. Sheegehalli-Yellachaguppe PD area drains into Vrishabhavathi River. Channenahal li kere, 
Jogipalya lake (along Magadi Road), two lakes in Kodagihalli, Kannelli l ake, Yalachaguppe 
Kere, Yelachaguppe 2nd kere, and Sulikere lake (part) are the lakes/ water bodies present 
within the Planning District calling for protection from future developments.  One lake in 
Kodagihalli is seen with large scale plantation.  
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: HIGH DENSITY  PLANNED DEVELOPMENT, INTEGRATION OF CIRCULATION 
NETWORK, AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION  
PROPOSALS 
1. PD is witnessing transforming rapidly into urban landscape and developments are fol lowing 
radial as well as scattered development pattern. It becomes imperative that RMP2031 d irects 
for planned urban development and promotion of economic growth along pro posed major 
Ring and Radials. Yet retain the agriculture zone in certain periphery area. The Plan ning 
District therefor falls under two planning zones of RMP2031 – Planning Zone B 
(Consolidation) and Planning Zone C (Agricultural Zone). Hence the governin g principles for 
the proposals for this PD are derived from both the concepts. The governing principle for this 
PD are as following: 
a. Promotion of Economic Growth along Rings/ Radials  
b. Development of Grid Pattern Circulation System allowing higher FAR consumption  
c. Promotion of Transit Oriented Development around Metro/ Mono Rail Stations  
d. Protection and Conservation of Lake System and  
e. Planned Open & Open Spaces 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
40-4 
2. In the Agriculture Zone, the RMP2031 proposes to guide the village develop ment and 
improved connectivity such that there is a wholesome approach to infrastructure 
upgradation. It is proposed to prepare Village Development Plan comprisi ng of Infrastructure 
Development within Gramathana, development of Gramathana peripheral road, 
development of village roads (to improve accessibility), lake rejuvenation and  lake area 
development, development of Bus Stations, development of SWM facilities, etc.  
3. The Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use Area Statement for the PD are g iven in 
Figure 40-2 and Table 40-2 respectively.  
4. The City level public transport infrastructure Metro Rail along Magadi Road and P RR are 
proposed to developed:  
a. Magadi Road Alignment: The Magadi Road alignment is proposed to be developed  
starting from Magadi Road Metro Station and run along the Magadi Road till 
Channenahalli (LPA limit), where ISBT Is proposed to be developed. Two stations are 
proposed to developed within PD – a) Janaseva Vidhya Kendra and b) Channenahalli (ISBT 
to be planned as inter change with Metro rail).  
b. Metro PRR: RMP2031 proposes Metro all along PRR and NICE Corridor. It is p roposed 
that interchange with Magadi Metro  be designed as Interchange.  
c. BRTS: RMP2031 proposes new road connecting Mysuru Road and Magadi Ro ad that  
cater to the connectivity between the south, south-west and west of the LPA and  
additionally catering to the upcoming dense development in Kempegowd a Layout 
located in this PD. It is proposed that the road  be designed to accommodate  BRTS in 
future if required.  
Figure 40-2: PD 39 Proposed Land Use Map   
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
40-5 
Table 40-2: PD 39 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 948.50 64.16 
Commercial 37.92 2.57 
Industrial 33.60 2.27 
Public & Semi Public 42.30 2.86 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 10.79 0.73 
Parks / open spaces 14.73 1.00 
Transport & Communication 165.17 11.17 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 3.58 0.24 
Water Bodies 36.56 2.47 
NGT Buffer 185.50 12.55 
Agriculture 254.56 - 
Total PD Area 1733.21 - 
 
5. RMP2031 proposes Inter State Bus Terminal on major radials and one such ISBT cum B MTC 
Depot is proposed to be developed Channenahalli village along the Magadi Road.  
6. Next to ISBT, the RMP2031 proposes to develop one Mini Logistic Hu b (including Truck 
Terminal in Channenahalli Village along the Magadi Road). 
7. To improve the accessibility to Public Transport Stations (BMTC Bus Stations and Bus 
terminals) and residential areas, educational institutions it is proposed to streng then the 
existing road network by providing footpaths and cycle tracks. It is propos ed that BBMP and 
BDA prepare the area accessibility plans.  
8. The RMP2031 has identified new links within the Planning district to improve the connectiv ity 
within the Planning District for ease of traffic movement.  
9. The RMP2031 has identified three critical junctions for geometric improvements for better 
and smoother traffic flow and to be taken up on priority. Some of the critical junctions are  
o Junction of Magadi road and 30 m new road in Channenahalli (next to Jana Seva 
Vidhya Kendra). A flyover is proposed to be developed here in future.  
o Junction of Magadi Road and Honganahatti – Yelachaguppe road; a Trumpet Flyoveris 
proposed to be developed. 
o Sheegehalli Cross Junction (Intersection of Magadi Road and Sheegihalli Main Roa d) 
10. The RMP2031 proposes upgradation of Master Plan Roads to improve their serv ice levels of 
these roads. Upgradation shall include development of road as per defined cross secti on, 
providing underground services (water supply, sewage, drainage, telecommun ication cables, 
electric cables upto 220kv, etc), Junction Improvements (including provid ing traffic signals), 
Flyovers, Bus Bay/ Shelter, cycle tracks, footpath, etc). The Important roads identified for 
complete upgradation and geometric improvement are as following: 
o Magadi Road 
o Tavarakere - Kengeri Road 
o Sheegehalli  Road 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
40-6 
o Sheegehalli – Kannahalli Road 
o Kenchanapura main road 
11. It is important to create new parks and open spaces for existing and developing areas wi thin 
the planning district, the RMP2031 therefore proposes to develop a sports co mplex in 
Channelli Village.  
12. PD area, except for part of Channenahalli village north of Magadi Road, drains in to 
Vrushabhavati River, while part of Channenahalli Village north of Magadi Road drains into 
Arakavathi River. Accordingly the natural drainage for PD has been classified.  
a. Drainage down stream of Kannelli connecting to Vrushabhavati River (via Sulikere)  = 
Secondary  
b. Drainage downstream of Yalachaguppe kere connecting Hosakere (Maragondanahalli 
Krishnasagara Kere) leading to Bhimanakuppe and further to Vrushabhavati River = 
Secondary.  
c. All other drainages leading to lakes and secondary streams (as shown in PLU Map) = 
Tertiary 
13. The RMP2031 proposes the protection and conservation of Channenahalli k ere, Jogipaly a 
lake (along Magadi Road), two lakes in Kodagihalli, Kannelli lake, Yalachaguppe Kere, 2nd 
kere in Yelachaguppe, aand their natural streams. It is therefore proposed that a Lake  
Rejuvenation and lake surrounding area be prepared and implemented.   
14. In order to cater to present and future infrastructure requirements, the RMP2031 proposes 8 
DWCCs, 1 Organic Waste Collection Centre, and 1 Bio-methanation Unit for solid waste 
management within the planning district.  
15. The RMP2031 proposes that 1 Fire Stations, 1 burial ground and 1 crematio n centre and 1 
sports complex is developed in this Planning District. 
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD 39 Sheegehalli – Yelachaguppe 
1. Road development Plan:  
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Catego ry -1 
Roads (as listed in Annexure) and other roads in phased manner.   
b. Development of identified new link/ improved connectivity:   
i. 30 m wide new road connecting to Magadi road passing through villages of 
Yelachaguppe, Yelachaguppe – Rampura and Channenahalli. 
ii. 24m new road connecting from Yelachaguppe – Rampura  Road to Magadi 
road. 
iii. 24m wide new road connecting from Kannahalli Village to Magadi Road 
through the Kempegowda Layout. 
iv. 18 m wide road for connectivity within the eastern part of the Kempegowda 
Layout which then extends further and joins the Magadi road. 
v. 18 m wide new road connecting the NICE road, passing through the 
Kannahalli village. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
40-7 
vi. 18 m wide road for connecting the NICE road, meeting the PRR at village 
Kodigehalli, and extending further to Seegehalli road and meeting the 
Magadi road. 
c. Upgradation of Master Plan Roads  
i. Magadi Road 
ii. Tavarakere - Kengeri Road 
iii. Sheegehalli Road 
iv. Seegehalli – Kannahalli Road 
v. Kenchanapura Main Road 
vi. Kodagihalli Main Road 
d. Junction improvement programme 
i. Junction of Magadi road and 30 m new road in Channenahalli (next to Jan a 
Seva Vidhya Kendra). A flyover is proposed to be developed here in future.  
ii. Junction of Magadi Road and Honganahatti – Yelachaguppe road; a Trumpet 
Flyoveris proposed to be developed. 
iii. Sheegehalli Cross Junction (Intersection of Magadi Road and Sheegihalli Main 
Road) 
iv. Intersection of existing village roads.  
e. Development of Gramathana Yellachaguppe Village Periphery Road 
2. Development of Public Transport System:  
a. Namma Metro: 
i. Magadi Road Metro  
ii. PRR/ NICE Metro 
b. BRTS: New Link connecting Mysuru Road and Magadi Roa 
c. Bus Stations: One each in Kodagihalli Village, and Yellachaguppe Village 
3. Preparation of Village Development Plans   
4. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes  and Streams :  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification  of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Rejuvenation of Lakes & Streams :  
i. RMP2031 Streams Rejuvenation Plan 
ii. Kannelli Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
iii. Yellachaguppe Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
iv. Rejuvenation Plan for 2nd Lake in Yellachaguppe Village  
v. Sheegehalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
vi. Chennenahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
vii. Kodagihalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
viii. Rejuvenation Plan for 2nd Lake in Kodagihalli Village  
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Surrounding Area development plan be prepared to upgrade the drainage and 
sewage infrastructure to stop flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as 
dumping of SWM.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
40-8 
5. Development of Physical and Social Infrastructure/ Facilities: 
a) Fire Station:     01 Nos. 
b) Crematorium:     01 Nos. 
c) Burial Ground:     01 Nos. 
d) SWM Dry Waste Collection Centre:   09 Nos. 
e) Organic Waste Collection Centre:  02 Nos. 
f) Bio-Methanation Unit:    01 Nos. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
41-1 
41. PD 40: MAKALI – MACHOHALLI 
 
 
A. EXISTING STATUS 
1. Makali – Machohalli PD admeasures ~3305.16 ha (33.05 sqkm) and falls completely within 
Dasanapura Hobli of Bengaluru North Taluk. It comprises of 19 revenue villages, n amely - 
Madanayakanahalli, Makali, Adakimaranahalli, Dasanapura, Narayanapalya, 
Harokyathanahalli, Siddanahosahalli, Madavara, Lakshmipura, Dombarahalli, Gavipalya, 
Kadaranahalli, Vaddarahalli, Lakkenahalli, Gangondanahalli, Bylakonenahalli, Byandahalli, 
Machohalli and Kachohalli. Revenue villages Kachohalli, Bylakonenahalli, Gangondanah alli, 
Lakshmipura, Srikantapura, and Madavara are partly under LPA of BDA and partly under LPA 
of BMICAPA. These villages are part of four Gram Panchayats, namely Dasanapura, Mad avara 
Machohalli, and Madanayakanahalli.    
2. Tumukur Road on Northern side, Magadi Road on southern side, and NICE Road on eastern 
side of the PD defines the road circulation along with existing roads, namely M agadi Cross 
road at Machohalli, Neelamangala Road, Kachohalli Main Road, Machohalli Main Road, 
Lakshmipura Road. As proposed by BMRCL Phase II Metro alignment is on the Tumukuru 
Road, with metro stations located just outside the boundary of this PD. A BM TC bus training 
centre is located in the PD.  
3. PD reflects road based growth pattern, particularly along Tumukuru Road and Magadi Roa d. 
Tumukuru Road is a major logistic and goods transport facility centre, while Magadi ro ad has 
private industrial areas. Whereas the northern and central part of the PD has predominant 
agriculture land use. At the sametime there are several unplanned plotted layouts breachi ng 
agriculture zone. Development along NICE road is premodinantly residential in nature.  
Population (2011 Census): 67,613 
Area of PD: 3305.16 ha 
Villages in PD: 19 
Gram Panchayats: Dasanapura, Madavara, 
Machohalli, and Madanayakanahalli 
Gross Density: 20 pph 
 
Makali- Machohalli Planning District (PD. 
No.40) is located North Western quadrant 
in BMA and shares its boundary with LPA 
of BMICAPA on eastern side and LPA of 
Neelammangala on western side. The 
Arakavati River and its eco-sensitive zone, 
logistic & goods transport facilities along 
Tumukuru Road, Chemical industries along 
Magadi Road, scattered layouts in the 
agriculture zone defines the characteristics 
of PD.  
The Master Plan, adopting the Aarkavati 
Eco sensitive zone, proposes limited 
development along Magadi Road and 
preservation of rest of the areas. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
41-2 
4. Logistics, Warehousing, Godown, Pharma along the Tumkuru road, Chemical and Textile 
along Magadi Road and brick kilns in Agriculture Zone, are the Industrial activitie s within PD, 
whereas Commercial activities are along Magadi and TUmukuru road. There are several 
educational institutes present in PD.  
5. As per Census 2011, PD has 67,613 inhabitants, with a decadal growth rate 139 % (2001- 
2011) and there are 47.9% resident workers in the PD. There are 17576 household s (2011), 
with avg. household size being 3.85, which is higher than BMA (4.01 ). The gross density is 20 
persons per hectare (pph), whereas the average net residential density is 310 pph. 
Madanayakanahalli, Siddanahosahalli, Machohalli and Kachohalli are among the mos t 
populated settlements with the PD. Most of the PD is witnessing developments of unplanned 
layouts for residential purposes.  
6. Agriculture land use is the predominant land use in this PD which accounts for 76% of total 
PD area. The current residential land use accounts for only ~6.64% of PD area whereas  
Transport and Communication accounts for 5.63%. The Industrial use and comm ercial use 
accounts ~3.76% and ~3% respectively. Figure 41-1 and Table 41-1 presents the Existing Lan d 
Use Map and Existing Land Use area statement respectively.  
Figure 41-1: PD 40 Existing Land Use Map  
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
41-3 
Table 41-1: PD 40 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 219.43 6.64 
Commercial 104.12 3.15 
Industrial 124.31 3.76 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 52.78 1.60 
Pubic & Semi Public - Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 0.13 0.00 
Parks & Open Spaces 1.14 0.03 
Transport and Communication 186.25 5.64 
Vacant 1060.27 32.08 
Agriculture 1468.49 44.43 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 21.53 0.65 
Water Bodies 66.73 2.02 
Total 3305.16 100.00 
 
7. The Arkavathy River passes through this PD, and the buffer zone of the T G Halli Reserv oir 
(Zone 1, Zone 3 and Zone 4 covers parts of the PD. It thus contains sev eral environmentally 
sensitive areas. 
8. There are 9 lakes within PD and they are Kachohalli Lake, Bylkonhalli Lake, Byand ahalli Tank, 
Lakkanahalli Lake, Lakshmipura Lake, Harokyathanahalli Lake, Makali Lake, Damodarhalli Lake 
and Dasanapura Lake.  
9. Water Supply is through Rural Development and Panchayat Raj Department, GoK. Mo st the 
developmental activities are dependent on ground wate r.  
10. As per Rural Development and Panchayat Raj Department, there are 41 schools in the PD. 
There is no playground, fire station and burial ground/ crematorium/ cemeteries in the PD.  
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION (ARAKAVATI AND TG HALLLI ECO-SENSITIVE 
ZONE AND LAKES AND DRAINAGE PROTECTION) AND PROPOMOTION OF LIMITED GROWTH IN 
SOUTHERN PART AND PRESERVATION OF AGRICULTURE ZONE.  
PROPOSALS 
1. The RMP2031 has adopted the provisions of Arakavati and TG Halli Eco-sensi tive Zone which 
covers most of the northern section, including the existing developments alon g Tumurkuru 
Road, on the other hand RMP2031 proposes to include large scale develop ments along the 
Magadi Road for planned intervention. The planning district for this reason is fall ing under 
both planning zones of RMP2031 – Planning Zone B (Consolidation) and Planning Zone C 
(Agricultural Zone). Thus, the governing principle for this PD are as following: 
a. Limited Growth and Integrating Existing Developments along Magadi Road 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
41-4 
b. Implementation of Arkavathy and TG Halli Eco-Sensitive Zone and Protecti on and 
conservation of Lakes. 
c. Preservation of Agriculture land use  
d. Guided Village Development 
2. The RMP2031 proposes high intensity development in the consolidation z one, i.e, within the 
conurbation area to support residential and commercial areas while rest of the areas have 
been kept for agriculture use. 
3. The RMP2031 proposes to guide the village development and improved conn ectivity such 
that there is a wholesome approach to infrastructure upgradation. The focus is on village 
development and hence it is proposed to prepare Village Development Plan comprisi ng of 
Infrastructure Development within Gramathana, development of Gramathana peripheral 
road, development of village roads (to improve accessibility), lake rejuv enation and lake area 
development, development of Bus Stations, development of SWM facilities, etc.  
4. The Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed Land Use Distribution for the PD ar e depicted in 
Figure 41-2 and Table 41-2 respectively.  
Figure 41-2: PD 40 Proposed Land Use Map  
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
41-5 
Table 41-2: PD 40 Proposed Land Use Area Statement  
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 205.12 46.27 
Commercial 7.77 1.75 
Industrial 103.93 23.44 
Public & Semi Public 11.86 2.68 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 0.07 0.02 
Parks / Open Spaces 6.64 1.50 
Transport & Communication 70.39 15.88 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 0.04 0.01 
Water Bodies 16.31 3.68 
NGT Buffer 21.20 4.78 
Total Developable Area 443.34 100.00 
Agriculture 2861.82 - 
Total PD Area 3305.16 - 
 
5. The City level public transport infrastructure are as follows:  
a. Magadi Road LRT/ Mono Rail/ BRT Alignment: The Magadi Road alignment is 
proposed to be developed starting from Magadi Road Metro Station and run along 
the Magadi Road till Channenahalli (LPA limit). Two stations are proposed to be 
developed within PD – a) Sheegehalli Cross Junction, Kadabagere Cross, Machohalli, 
and Chikka Gollarhatti leading to interchange at NICE.  
b. Metro PRR: RMP2031 proposes Metro all along PRR and NICE Corridor. It is proposed 
that interchange with Magadi Metro  be designed as Interchange.  
6. RMP2031 proposes Inter State Bus Terminal on major radials and one such ISBT cum B MTC 
Depot is proposed to be developed Adakaramaranahlli village along the Tumukur Road  (in 
Agriculture Zone) and second won at Machohalli along the Magadi Road. A b us depot is 
proposed at Kadaranahali village located at the edge of the BDA LPA boundary. An Integrated 
Logistics hub is proposed on Tumkur road in Makali outside the Arakavati Eco Zones.  
7. To improve the accessibility to Public Transport Stations (BMTC Bus Station s and Bus 
terminals) and residential areas, it is proposed to strengthen the existing road network b y 
providing footpaths and cycle tracks.  
8. It is important to create new parks and open spaces for existing and developing areas wi thin 
the planning district. The RMP2031 proposes development of Regional Park in 
Harokyathanahalli village. 
9. Entire PD drains into Arakavati River and all the lakes are connected to Arakavati River  
through network of drains/ streams. The classification of natural drainage system wi thin the 
PD is as following: 
a. Arakavati River = Primary  
b. Drainage downstream of Madavara Kere and connecting to Arakavati River = 
Secondary  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
41-6 
c. Drainage downstream of Lakshmipura Lake, Dasarahalli Lake (in BBMP), 
Nallakadirenahalli Lake (in BBMP) and Herohalli Kere (In BBMP) and connecting to 
Secondary Drain or has outfall outside LPA of BDA = Tertiary 
10. The RMP2031 proposes the protection and conservation of all lakes within the PD. Lake 
Rejuvenation and lake surrounding area are required to be prepared .  
11. In order to cater to present and future infrastructure requirements for BMA, the RMP2031 
proposes development of one 220kv power sub-station, additional 6 DWCCs (i n RR Nagar and 
villages of Machohalli, Kachohalli, Gangondanahalli, Dasanapura) for solid waste 
management within the planning district.  
12. The RMP2031 proposes 1 fire station, 1 cremation ground and 1 burial g round at suitable 
locations within PD.  
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the programmes and projects for PD 40. 
1. Road development Plan:  
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Catego ry -1 
Roads (as listed in Annexure) and other roads in phased manner.  
b. Upgradation of Existing Roads 
i. Magadi road is proposed to be widened  
ii. Lakshimipura road is proposed to be widened 
iii. Nelamangala road is proposed to be widened. 
iv. Machohalli main road is proposed to be developed. 
v. Kachohalli main road 
vi. Other Village Roads 
c. Development of Village Periphery roads for: 
i. Lakshmipura Gramathana,  
ii. Gangondanahalli Gramathana, 
iii. Harokyathanahalli Gramathana 
iv. Malagondanahalli Village. 
d. Development of identified new link/ improved connectivity:   
i. Peripheral Ring Road 
ii. Pipeline road as alternate connection from Byaderahalli to Seegehalli. 
e. Junction Improvement Plan 
i. Kadabagere Cross 
ii. Sheegehalli Junction on Magadi road 
iii. Machohalli Gate Junction  
iv. Kachohalli Gate Junction 
v. Ganagondanahlli Junction 
vi. Madanayakanahalli Junction (On Tumukuru Road) 
vii. Makali Cross Junction 
2. Development of Public and Goods Transport System:  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
41-7 
a. Namma Metro 
viii. Metro PRR  
ix. Metro Magadi Road  
b. Inter State Bus Terminus: 
x. Machohalli along the Magadi Road  
xi. Tumkur road at Adakamaranahalli Bus Stop junction.  
c. Bus stations/ Depot: 
xii. Bus Depot in Kadaranahali village.   
d. Logistic Hub (Makali along Tumukuru Road 
3. Preparation of Village Development Plans  
4. Development of Parks and Open Spaces 
a. Regional Park:    01 Nos. (Harokyathanahalli Village) 
5. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes and Streams:  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification  of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Rejuvenation of Lakes & Streams : 
i. RMP2031 Streams Rejuvenation Plan 
ii. Kachohalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
iii. Bylkonhalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
iv. Byandahalli Tank Rejuvenation Plan 
v. Lakkanahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
vi. Lakshmipura Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
vii. Harokyathanahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
viii. Makali Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
ix. Damodarhalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan  
x. Dasanapura Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
d. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Surrounding Area development plan be prepared to upgrade the drainage and 
sewage infrastructure to stop flow of sewage into streams and lake as well as 
dumping of SWM.  
6. Development of Physical and Social Infrastructure/ Facilities: 
a) Fire Station:     02 Nos. (Tumukuru & Magadi 
Road) 
b) Crematorium:     01 Nos. 
c) Burial Ground:     01 Nos. 
d) SWM Dry Waste Collection Centre:    06 Nos. 
e) Organic Waste Collection Centre:   01 Nos. 
f) STP/ OHT/ ISP/ GLSR:    as per Water and Sewage 
Network 
g) 220kv Sub-station:     01 Nos. Kadaranahalli village 
7. Preparation of Water and Sewage Network Plan for Conurbation Area and  Gramathanas 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
42-1 
42. PD 41: ALURU 
 
A. Existing Situation 
1. The Aluru Planning District admeasures 2953.51 Ha (29.53 sq km) comprises of 1 6 revenue 
villages namely, Thammarasanahalli, Hurlichikkanahalli, Kodagithirumalapura, Bil ajaji, 
Hessaraghatta (Part), Tharabanahalli, Sasiveghatta and Ivarakandapura villages in 
Hessaraghatta Hobli and Nagasandra, Narasipura, Muniyanapalya, Thammenahalli, 
Kuduragere, Aluru, Heggadadevanapura and Hanumanthasagara villages of Dasanapura 
Hobli. All these villages are under different by Gram Panchayats, namely Madanayakanahal li, 
Aluru, Huskur, Hurlichikkanahalli, and Hesaraghatta .  
2. The Government of Karnataka in order to protect and preserve the watershed area of T.G. 
Halli Reservior and Arakavati River, issued an Notification on T.G.Halli Conservatio n and its 
Zone (Notification G.O. No. FEE 215 ENV 2000 dated 18.11.2003, Bangalore) defining the 
extents of Eco-sensitive zones and regulations thereof. Aluru - Hesaraghatta Planning District 
has been delineated based these TG Hall and Arkavati River Buffer Zones.  
3. The PD is characterized by the presence of Arakavati River and its eco-sensitive z one, Indian 
Institute of Horticulture Research, large lakes (Hessaraghatta (in part), Ivarakandapura Kere, 
Aluru Kere, etc), the Chimney Hill Air Force Station, Biscuit Factory, Aluru KSCA Cricket  
Ground, Aluru forest, BDA EWS Housing Scheme, Acharya Collage of Nursing and the 
predominant Agriculture landscape. The environmentally sensitive area is witnessing limited 
yet scattered developmental activities within the buffer zones and areas adjoining Aluru 
forest. Warehousing, Gowdown, and Biscuit Factory in Heggadadevanapura and scattered 
industries like Pharma, brick kiln, etc are the industrial activities within the PD.  
Population (2011 Census): 23390 
Area of PD: 2953.51 ha 
Villages in PD: 16 
Gram Panchayats: Madanayakanahalli, 
Aluru, Huskur, Hurlichikkanahalli, and 
Hesaraghatta 
Gross Density: 08 pph 
 
Aluru Planning District (PD. No.41) is 
located North west in BMA and shares its 
boundary with LPA of Neelammangala on 
western side and LPA of BMICAPA on 
southern side. The Arakavati River and its 
eco-sensitive zone is the basis for 
delineation of this predominantly 
agriculture PD. 
 
The Master Plan in full adherence to 
Aarkavati Eco sensitive zone proposes to 
retain entire PD as agriculture zone and 
preservation of environment.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
42-2 
4. Hessarghatta Main Road, Huskur Road, Kuduregere Road, KSCA Stadium Road, Shivakote 
Main Road, IIHR Main Road, Khasaghattapura Road, Acharya Doctor Sarvapalli Radhakrisn an 
Road, Makali - Aluru Road, and Tarabanahalli - Silvepura Road define the existing roa d 
network. Tumkuru Road passes through PD 40 and south of PD boundary. Similarly , 
Bengaluru – Mangaluru and Bengaluru – Mumbai Railway line passes through PD. There is an 
opportunity to develop small station at Muniyanapalya. No Bus Terminal/ Station currently 
have been established in this PD.  
5. As per Census 2011, PD has 23390 inhabitants, which is has increased by 54.8% fro m 2001 
(15114) and there are 10786 (46.1%) resident workers. There are 5812 household s (2011), 
with Avg. Household size being 4, which is similar to average HH Size in BMA (4.01). The gross 
density is 8 persons per hectare (pph), whereas the average residential density is 310 pph. 
6. Agriculture land use accounts for ~73% total PD area, followed by Water bodi es accounting 
for almost 6% of total area. Residential accounts for 4.5%, which is primarily t owards 
sĐatteƌed plotted deǀelopŵeŶtal aŶd GƌaŵathaŶa͛s. Heggadadevanapura, 
Kodagithirumalapura, Hurlichikkanahalli, Ivarakandapura and Aluru are among the most  
populated settlements as well as they are witnessing plotted developments with in the PD. 
BDA is also developing its Housing Scheme/ Flats in Aluru village. Tr ansport and 
Communication accounts for 4.63% of total area The Industrial use and commercial u se 
accounts 0.48% and 0.82% of total area respectively. Figure 42-1 and Error! Reference source 
not found.  presents the Existing Land Use Map and Existing Land Use area statement for PD.  
7. The Arkavathy River passes through this Planning District, and the buffer zone of  the T G Halli 
Reservoir (Zone 1, Zone 3 and Zone 4) lies partly within this PD. Part of Hesaraghatta  
Reservoir, Aluru kere (part), Ivarakandapura Kere, Bilijaji Kere, Huralichikkanhalli Kere, 
Kuduregere Lake, Heggadadevanapura Kere Hanumanthasagara Kere, Kumbarahalli Kere, 
Unnamed 2 nd Kere in Kumbharahalli village, unnamed 2 nd Kere in Hurlichikkanahalli village, 
unnamed 2 nd Kere in Aluru Village are the lakes available in PD. Two water bodies (as  per 
revenue records) one in Heggadadevanapura and one in Kodagithirumalapura v illage have 
been breached, whereas some of water bodies are seen with dense vegetation. 
8. Water Supply is through Rural Development and Panchayat Raj Department, GoK. Mo st the 
developmental activities are dependent on ground water.   
9. There are 11 schools in the PD; however there are some pockets which do not h ave access to 
primary schools within 1 km radius. Private educational institutes like Sidaganga PU  Collage, 
Indian Institute of Horticulture Research, Acharya Collage of Nursing, etc, are also present  in 
the area.Karnataka State Cricket Association cricket ground facility is developed Alur vill age. 
This offers an opportunity to create large scale sporting complex. There is one grave y ard in 
village Heggadadevanapura.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
42-3 
Figure 42-1: PD 41 Existing Land Use Map 
 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
42-4 
Table 42-1: PD 41 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 134.87 4.57  
Commercial 24.33 0.82  
Industrial 14.03 0.48  
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00  
Public Semi Public 245.49 8.31  
Pubic & Semi Public - Unclassified 18.09 0.61  
Public Utility 4.89 0.17  
Parks & Open Spaces 13.60 0.46  
Transport Communication 127.70 4.32  
Vacant 570.38 19.31  
Agriculture 1583.58 53.62  
Forest 48.86 1.65  
Streams 29.08 0.98  
Water Bodies 138.60 4.69  
Total 2953.50  100.00  
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION (IMPLEMENTATION OF TG HALLI & 
ARAKAVATI RIVER ECO SENSITIVE ZONE, LAKE REJUVENATION AND PROTECTION OF 
FOREST), PRESERVATION OF AGRICULTURE ZONE , GRAMATHANA DEVELOPMENT 
 
PROPOSALS 
 
1. The preservation and conservation of Arakavati eco-sensitive zones is the premise on  which 
the PD area was delineated and the RMP2031 continues with its objective of environme nt 
protection and therefore has proposed preservation of entire PD as agriculture z one. While 
doing so the The RMP2031 proposes to guide the village develop ment and improved 
connectivity such that there is a wholesome approach to infrastructure upgradation. The 
focus is on village development and hence it is proposed to prepare Village Development 
Plan comprising of Infrastructure Development within Gramathana, development of 
Gramathana peripheral road, development of village roads (to improve accessibili ty), lake 
rejuvenation and lake area development, development of Bus Stations, development of SW M 
facilities, etc.  
2. The Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed land use area statement is presented in Figure 
42-2 and Table 42-2 respectively .  
3. To improve the public transport facility it is proposed to develop BMTC bus stations at at 
Hurlechikkanahalli village and the other one at Kuduragere. As for CRS, the RMP2031 
proposes that a railway station to cater to CRS passengers may be developed at 
Muniyanapalya, depending on the feasibility of development of railway station.  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
42-5 
4. The proposed PRR passes through south western corner of PD. The RMP2031 propose s 
development/ upgradation of eight roads within the PD. 
Figure 42-2: PD 41 Proposed Land Use Map 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
42-6 
Table 42-2: PD 41 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 0.00 0.00 
Commercial 0.00 0.00 
Industrial 0.00 0.00 
Public & Semi Public 0.00 0.00 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 0.07 0.07 
Parks / Open Spaces 0.00 0.00 
Transport & Communication 0.00 0.00 
Forest 0.00 0.00 
Streams 0.00 0.00 
Water Bodies 0.00 0.00 
NGT Buffer 0.00 0.00 
Total Developable Area 0.00 00.00 
Agriculture 2953.52 - 
Total PD Area 2953.52 - 
 
5. Entire PD drains into Arakavati River and all the lakes are connected to Arakavati River  
through network of drains/ streams. The classification of natural drainage system withi n the 
PD is as following: 
a. Arakavati River = Primary  
b. Drainage downstream of Chikkabanavara Kere and connecting to Arakavati River = 
Secondary  
c. Drainage connecting directly to Arakavati River or Secondary Drain or has outfall  
outside LPA of BDA = Tertiary 
6. The RMP2031 proposes the protection and conservation of Hesaraghatta Reservoi r, Aluru 
kere, Ivarakandapura kere, Bilijaji Kere, Huralichikkanhalli Kere, Kuduregere Lake, 
Heggadadevanapura Kere Hanumanthasagara Kere, Kumbarahalli Kere, 2nd Kere in 
Kumbharahalli village, 2nd Kere in Hurlichikkanahalli village, 2nd Kere in Aluru Village and their 
natural streams. It is therefore proposed that a Lake Rejuvination and lake surroundin g area 
be prepared and implemented.   
7. The RMP2031 proposes to develop one fire station within PD, and for SWM , it is proposed to 
develop 2 DWCCs, 1 OWCC and 1 Bio-methanation Unit for SWM, and 1 cremation centre are 
proposed to be developed.  
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD 41, Alluru 
1. Village Development Plan: It is proposed that Gram Panchayat prepares Village Development 
Plans for each village within Planning District for implementation of RMP2031 p roposals.  
2. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes  and Streams :  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
42-7 
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Rejuvenation of Lakes & Streams :  
i. RMP2031 Streams Rejuvenation Plan 
ii. Aluru Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
iii. Ivarakandapura Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
iv. Bilijaji Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
v. Huralichikkanhalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
vi. Kuduregere Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
vii. Heggadadevanapura Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
viii. Hanumanthasagara Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
ix. Kumbarahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan  
x. Rejuvenation Plan for 2nd Kere in Kumbharahalli village 
xi. Rejuvenation Plan for 2nd Kere in Hurlichikkanahalli village 
xii. Rejuvenation Plan for 2nd Kere in Aluru village 
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Area development plan be prepared .  
3. Development of Park: A large scale City level sports complex is proposed to develop near to 
Aluru Cricket ground.  
4. Road development Plan:  
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Category - 1 
Roads (as listed in Annexure) and other roads in phased manner.  
b. Upgradation of Existing Roads 
i. Huskur Road, 
ii. Kuduregere Road,  
iii. KSA Stadium Road,  
iv. Hessarghatta Main Road,  
v. Shivakote Main Road,  
vi. IIHR Main Road,  
vii. Khasaghattapura Road,  
viii. Acharya Doctor Sarvapalli Radhakrisnan Road 
ix. Makali Alur Road,  
x. Tarabanahalli Silvepura Road.  
c. Development of Village Periphery roads for: 
i. Aluru Gramathana,  
ii. Sasiveghatta Gramathana, 
iii. Thorenagasandra Gramathana 
iv. Huralijikananhalli 
v. Bilijaji 
d. Development of identified new link/ improved connectivity:   
i. Peripheral Ring Road 
e. Junction Improvement Plan 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
42-8 
i. Intersection Section between one village road to another village road 
5. Development of Public Transport System:  
a. Bus Station: One at Hurlechikkanahalli village and the other one at Kuduragere 
village.  
6. Development of Physical and Social Infrastructure/ Facilities: 
a) Fire Station:     01 Nos. 
b) Crematorium:     01 Nos. 
c) Burial Ground:     01 Nos. 
d) SWM Dry Waste Collection Centre:    02 Nos. 
e) Organic Waste Collection Centre:   01 Nos. 
f) STP/ OHT/ ISP/ GLSR:    as per Water and Sewage 
Network 
7. Preparation of Water and Sewage Network Plan for Gramathanas
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
43-1 
43. PD 42: RAJANAKUNTE  
                                                                                                       Population (2011 Census): 22,541  
Area of PD: 4150.9 Ha 
Villages in PD: 22 
Gram Panchayats: Sheekoti , 
Raja nakunte , Shinganayakanahalli, and 
Vaderahalli 
Gross Density: 05 PPH 
Rajanakunte Planning District (Planning 
District no. 42) is located in northern 
periphery in BMA and shares its 
boundary with LPA of BIAPPA. PD is 
environmentally sensitive with 28 
lakes, Jarakabande Reserved Forest / 
Avalahalli Fores and Bylekere Peacock 
Santury .  
The RMP2031 proposes that except for 
village settlements, the PD be 
preserved as agriculture zone and 
environmental protection.  
A. EXISTING STATUS 
1. Rajanakunte Planning District admeasures around 4150.9 ha and consists of 22 v illages , 
namely - Addiganahalli, Shinganayakanahalli Amanikere, Shinganayakanahalli, Honnenahal li, 
Rajanakunte, Itagal- pura, Madappanahalli, Krishnarajapura, Krishnasagara, Aavalahalli, 
Ramagondahalli, Jyarakabandekavalu, Lingarajapura, Mylappanahalli, Muthakarahalli, 
Linganahalli, Shivako te, Kalenahalli, Maddagirihalli, Lingarajasagara, Kondasheihalli, and 
Mavalipura. These villages are part of four Gram Panchayats, namely - Sheekoti, Rajanakun te, 
Shinganayakanahalli, and Vaderahalli. PD shares its northern boundary with LPA of BIAAPA, 
which has influenced developments along Doddaballapura road in Rajanakunte and 
Adiganahalli villages.  
2. The PD is characterized by the presence of Zone 4 of Arakavati River Conservati on Area, 28 
lakes (Shinganayakanahalli Amanikere being the largest), Jakabande Reserve Forest (Bylakere 
Peacock Reserve), Madappanahalli Forest Plantation, KMF Cattle Feed Mixing Pl ant, 
Yelahanka RTO Test Track, Power Grid Transit Camp, KPTCL Sub-station, Cricket Groun d, 
educational insitututes like - International Centre for Theoretical Sciences, ICAR - Nation al 
Institute of Veterinary Epidemiology and Disease Informatics, Indian Veterinary Research 
Institute, etc, Lingarajapura Integrated Waste Processing Using, large village settelements  
Adiganahalli, Rajanakunte, Shivakote, scattered and unplanned layouts in the predominant 
Agriculture landscape.  

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
43-2 
3. Doddaballapura Road, Sir MVIT Collage Road, Madhure Temple Road, Ivar Kandapura  – MS 
Palya Road, Tarbanahalli – Yelahanka Road (via Dodda Bylekere), Singanayakanahalli- 
Lingarajapura Road, CRPF Camp to kurubarahalli Road (via Lingarajapura) are the major road 
within the PD.  
4. Bengaluru – New Delhi Rail line passes through the PD, with railway station at Rajanakunte.  
5. As per Census 2011, the PD has a population of 22541, which has increased with  a decadal 
growth of 61.6% since 2001. There are 9,756 workers (workforce participation rate = 43.3%,) 
which is slightly lower than the BMA average of 44.5%. There are 5501 household s with an 
average HH size of 4.10, which is higher than BMA (4.01). The gross density of the PD i s 5 
pph. The density is highest in Rajanakunte village (28 pph), whereas there are 4 uni nhabited 
villages: Shinganayakanahalli Amanikere, Krishnasagara, Lingarajasagara and 
Jyarakabandekavalu. 
6. The planning district has sparse access to medical services, with a large portion of the 
planning district more than 5 kms away from the nearest medical facility. There are about 26 
schools in the planning district, yet some areas are more than 1 km away from the n earest 
primary school. There are higher educational facilities in this area, due to availa bility of large 
parcels of land. Several engineering colleges like BMS institute of Engineering, Pi llappa 
college of Engineering and Sai Vidya Insitute of Technology.  
7. Agriculture use accounts for 76% of total PD area, followed by Forests (accoun ting for ~8%) 
and water bodies accounting for ~5% of PD Area. Residential areas (mainly Gramathan as and 
scattered plotted developments) account for 3.76%. Figure 43-1 and Error! Reference source 
not found.  represents existing land use map and existing land use area statement for the PD 
respectively.  
8. Water Bodies and Streams account for 4.94% of total are as there are 28 lakes within the PD. 
Shinganayakanahalli Amani Kere (spread in six revenue villages), Kalenahalli Kere, 
Addiganahalli Kere, Aavalahalli Kere, Krishnasagara Kere, Honnenahalli Kere, Krishnarajapura 
Kere, Itagallipura Kere, four unnamed lakes in Itagallipura Revenue Village, Mylappanah alli 
Kere, one unnamed kere in Mylappanahalli Lake, Madappanahalli kere, three unnamed lakes 
in Madappanahalli revenue village, Mavallipura Kere, two unnamed kere in Maval lipura 
revenue village, Linganahalli Kere, one unnamed lake in Linganahalli, Ramagonda nahalli Kere, 
Ivarukandapura Kere (part), and other unnamed lake within PD. 
9. The ridge of Bengaluru passes through planning district, which has divided into t wo different 
watersheds and therefore drains into two different watersheds, namely – Hebbal Watershed 
and Arakavati Watershed. Lakes on the eastern side of Jarakabande Forest drain into Hebbal 
watershed whereas those on westernside drain into Arakavati River.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
43-3 
Figure 43-1: PD 42 Existing Land Use Map  
 
 
Table 43-1: PD 42 Existing Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage to Total Area (%) 
Residential 145.70 3.51 
Commercial 15.70 0.38 
Industrial 24.79 0.60 
Quarry/ Mining Sites 0.00 0.00 
Public Semi Public 81.12 1.95 
Pubic & Semi Public - Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 30.22 0.73 
Parks and Open Spaces 9.23 0.22 
Transport Communication 65.35 1.57 
Vacant 450.22 10.85 
Agriculture 2790.47 67.23 
Forest 333.16 8.03 
Streams 7.85 0.19 
Water Bodies 197.12 4.75 
Total 4150.93 100.00 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
43-4 
B. RMP2031 PROPOSALS 
RMP2031 DIRECTIONS: ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION LAKE REJUVENATION AND 
PROTECTION OF FOREST), PRESERVATION OF AGRICULTURE ZONE, GRAMATHANA 
DEVELOPMENT AND TRANSPORT INTEGRATION 
PROPOSALS 
1. PD is witnessing developments all along Doddaballapura road and more profo undly in 
Rajanakunte – Adiganahalli village (for being next BIAAPA). At the same time, conurbation 
limits of RMP 2015 (south western sides in PD) are yet to be consumed.  Further, the 
preservation and conservation lakes and drainage system is important objective of t he 
RMP2031. The Peripheral Ring Road is proposed to be developed for BMA and it passess  
through southern side in PD. The RMP2031 therefore has following guiding principles for PD: 
a. Limit the Growth to conurbation limits  
b. Address the growth in Adiganahalli – Rajanakunte Area  
c. Protection and conservation of lakes and drainage system 
d. Protection and Conservation of Forest Areas  
e. Preserving Agriculture use while guiding village development 
2. The RMP2031 proposes to guide the village development and improved conn ectivity such 
that there is a wholesome approach to infrastructure upgradation. The focus is on village  
development and hence it is proposed to prepare Village Development Plan comprisi ng of 
Infrastructure Development within Gramathana, development of Gramathana peripheral 
road, development of village roads (to improve accessibility), lake rejuv enation and lake area 
development, development of Bus Stations, development of SWM facilities, etc.  
3. The Proposed Land Use Map and Proposed land use area statement is presented in Figure 
43-2 and Error! Reference source not found.  respectively.  
4. RMP2031 proposed city level public transport infrastructure like CRS, and Metro are running 
along roads within the Planning District. 
a. Metro PRR Link: The RMP2031, with a long term view, has proposed to develop 
metro link along proposed PRR alignment.  
b. BRTS on Doddaballapura Road: The Master proposes to upgrade doddaballapura 
road from Yelahanka to Rajanakunte for Development of BRTS System.  
c. CRS: The RMP2031 proposes that a railway station to cater to CRS passengers 
may be developed at Rajanakunte, depending on the feasibility of development 
of railway station.  
5. To improve the public transport facility it is proposed to develop BMTC bus stations at 
Honnenahalli villag e (along Doddaballapura Road) and other one at Lingarajapuram (along 
proposed PRR) .  
6. The RMP2031 proposes development/ upgradation of all existing village roads and junction 
improvement  be taken up for all existing intersection.  
 
 
 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
43-5 
Figure 43-2: PD 42 Proposed Land Use Map  
 
Table 43-2: PD 42 Proposed Land Use Area Statement 
Landuse Category Area (in Ha) Percentage To Total Developable Area (%) 
Residential 287.54 61.56 
Commercial 2.92 0.63 
Industrial 11.34 2.43 
Public & Semi Public 41.84 8.96 
Unclassified 0.00 0.00 
Public Utility 0.00 0.00 
Parks / Open Spaces 11.60 2.48 
Transport & Communication 60.97 13.05 
Forest 2.86 0.61 
Streams 0.75 0.16 
Water Bodies 17.67 3.78 
NGT Buffer 29.57 6.33 
Total Developable Area 467.06 100.00 
Agriculture 0.00 - 
Total PD Area 4150.93 - 

Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
43-6 
7. As discussed earliert, PD is part of Arakavati watershed and Hebbala watershed. The 
classification of natural drainage system within the PD is as following (and have b een marked 
in PLU Maps): 
a. Drainage Downstream of Shinganayakanahalli Amanikere and connecting to 
Yelahanka Kere = Secondary 
b. Drainage connecting directly to Arakavati River or Secondary Drain or has outfall  
outside LPA of BDA = Tertiary  
8. The RMP2031 proposes the protection and conservation of all 28 lakes within the PD. and 
their natural streams. It is therefore proposed that a Lake Rejuvination and lake surrounding  
area be prepared. 
9. The RMP2031 proposes to develop one fire station within PD, and it i s proposed to develop 2 
DWCCs, 1 OWCC for SWM, and 1 cremation centre are proposed to be developed.  
PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS 
The RMP2031 has broken down the proposals to implementable programs and projects for every 
planning district. Following are the projects for PD 42 , Rajanakunte 
 
1. Village Development Plan: It is proposed that Gram Panchayat prepares Village Development 
Plans for each village within Planning District for implementation of RMP2031 pro posals.  
2. Protection and Rejuvenation of Lakes  and Streams :  
a. Demarcation of Lakes and Streams : It is proposed that the Lakes and streams within 
the PD  be clearly demarcated on ground within first two years after notification of 
the RMP2031 .  
b. Rejuvenation of Lakes & Streams :  
i. Master Plan Streams Rejuvenation Plan 
ii. Shinganayakanahalli Amani Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
iii. Kalenahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan ,  
iv. Addiganahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan, 
v. Aavalahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan,   
vi. Krishnasagara Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
vii. Honnenahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
viii. Krishnarajapura Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
ix. Itagallipura Kere Rejuvenation Plan ,  
x. Rejuvenation Plan for four unnamed lakes in Itagallipura Revenue Village, 
xi. Mylappanahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
xii. Rejuvenation Plan for one unnamed kere in Mylappanahalli,  
xiii. Madappanahalli kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
xiv. Rejuvenation Plan for three unnamed lakes in Madappanahalli revenue 
village,  
xv. Mavallipura Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
xvi. Rejuvenation Plan for two unnamed kere in Mavallipura revenue village,  
xvii. Linganahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan,  
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
43-7 
xviii. Rejuvenation Plan for one unnamed lake in Linganahalli,  
xix. Ramagondanahalli Kere Rejuvenation Plan ,  
xx. Ivarukandapura Kere Rejuvenation Plan 
xxi. Rejuvenation Plan for other unnamed lake within PD. 
c. Lake Surrounding Area Development Plan: It is proposed that a Lake and Stream 
Area development plan should be prepared.  
3. Development of Park: A large scale City level sports complex is proposed to develop near to 
existing Cricket ground in Ittagalapura .  
4. Road development Plan:  
a. Master Plan Road Demarcation and Land Acquisition for development of Category - 1 
Roads (as listed in Annexure) and other roads in phased manner.  
b. Upgradation of Existing Roads 
i. Doddaballapura Road,  
ii. Sir MVIT Collage Road,  
iii. Madhure Temple Road,  
iv. Ivar Kandapura – MS Palya Road,  
v. Tarbanahalli – Yelahanka Road (via Dodda Bylekere),  
vi. Singanayakanahalli- Lingarajapura Road,  
vii. CRPF Camp to kurubarahalli Road (via Lingarajapura) 
c. Development of Village Periphery roads for villages as earmarked in PLU map 
d. Development of identified new link/ improved connectivity:   
i. Peripheral Ring Road 
ii. 30m wide road from PRR to Doddaballapura (at Rajanakunte) 
iii. Rajanakunte – Adiganahalli Periphery Road 
e. Junction Improvement Plan 
i. Railway Bridge at Rajanakunte to be widened to four lanes 
ii. Intersection Section between one village road to another village road 
5. Development of Public Transport System:  
a. CRS – Development of Rajanakunte Railway Station 
b. Namma Metro – Metro PRR 
c. BRTS – Yelahanka to Rajanakunte (to be extended till Doddaballapura in future) 
d. Bus Station:  
i. At Honnenahalli village (along Doddaballapur Road)  
ii. At Lingarajapura village (along proposed Peripheral Ring Road).  
6. Development of Physical and Social Infrastructure/ Facilities: 
a) Fire Station:     01 Nos. 
b) Crematorium:     01 Nos. 
c) Burial Ground:     01 Nos. 
d) SWM Dry Waste Collection Centre:    04 Nos. 
e) Organic Waste Collection Centre:   01 Nos. 
Revised Master Plan for Bengaluru - 2031 (Draft): Volume-4 
43-8 
f) STP/ OHT/ ISP/ GLSR:    as per Water and Sewage 
Network 
7. Preparation of Water and Sewage Network Plan for Gramathanas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Town Planner Member 
BDA  
 
Commissioner 
BDA  
 
Chairman 
BDA 
 
 
===== END FILE: Bengaluru-BDA-RMP-2031-Volume_4_PlanningDistrictReport.pdf =====

===== START FILE: DISTRICT PROFILE-BANGALORE URBAN.pdf =====
[No text extracted]

===== END FILE: DISTRICT PROFILE-BANGALORE URBAN.pdf =====

===== START FILE: r5_final_feasibility_report_19_12_2024-compressed.pdf =====
FINAL FEASIBILITY REPORT 
December 2024Comprehensive Bengaluru City  Traffic Management Infrastructure Plan 
Proposal s for Vehicular Tunnel / Grade Separator / Road Widening In 
Selected Corridors .
Government  of Karnataka
Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP)
1
1
This  document  has been  prepared  for the “Consultancy  services  for preparation  of Comprehensive  Bengaluru  City road  
Infrastructure  plan  to decongest  traffic  and to prepare  comprehensive  Traffic  Management  Plan  for proposal  of Vehicular  
Tunnel  / Grade  separator  / Road  widening  in selected  corridors . ” and should  not be relied  upon  or used  for any other  project  
without  an independent  check  being  carried  out as to its suitability  and prior  written  authority  of Altinok  being  obtained . 
Altinok  accepts  no responsibility  or liability  for the consequence  of this document  being  used  for a purpose  other  than  the 
purposes  for which  it was commissioned . Any  person  using  or relying  on the document  for such  other  purpose  agrees  and will 
by such  use or reliance  be taken  to confirm  his agreement  to indemnify  for all loss or damage  resulting  there  from . Altinok  
accepts  no responsibility  or liability  for this document  to any part other  than  the person  by whom  it was commissioned . DISCLAIMER:
Consultancy services for preparation of Comprehensive Bengaluru city road infrastructure 
plan to decongest traffic and to prepare comprehensive traffic management plan for proposal 
of vehicular tunnel / Grade separator / Road widening in selected corridors.
2
This  document  has been  prepared  for the “Consultancy  services  for preparation  of Comprehensive  Bengaluru  City road  
Infrastructure  plan  to decongest  traffic  and to prepare  comprehensive  Traffic  Management  Plan  for proposal  of Vehicular  
Tunnel  / Grade  separator  / Road  widening  in selected  corridors . ” by Altinok  Consulting  Engineering  Pvt.Ltd, New  Delhi . 
The consultants  have  satisfactorily  completed  the consultancy  services .PROJECT APPROVAL CERTIFICATE
3Consultants
Altinok Consulting 
Engineering Pvt. Ltd
New DelhiAE
Road Infra, BBMPAEE
Road Infra, BBMPEE
Road Infra, BBMP
Page 8 -14
BACKGROUND  
Page 15 -18
STUDY  AREA
Page 19 -23
METHODOLOGY
Page 24 -27
PRIMARY  SURVEYSPage  34-132
TUMAKURU  ROAD
Proposed  Split  Flyover  at MEI  intersection  
along  Tumakuru  road  C 01Page 150-189
J.C.ROAD
Integrated  Elevation  from  Hudson  
Circle  to Minarva  Circle  (Minavara  
Circle,  Bharat -Talks,  Shivaji  Talkies,  
Town  Hall,  LIC,  Halasuru  Police  
Station,  Hudson  Circle,  Cubbon  Park) .C 03TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page 190-248
KANAKAPURA  ROAD
Proposed  Underpass  at Konankuntae  
Cross  for Through  Traffic  from  
Kanakapura  to BanashankariC 04Page 33 -576
STRATEGIC TRAFFIC 
AUGMENTATION FOR HIGH -
IMPACT ROADS06Page 28 -32
TRAVEL DEMAND MODEL - 
Approach to Modelling for Proposed Elevated 
Corridors, Tunnels & Underpasses 05 01
02
03
04
4Page  133-149
TUMAKURU  ROAD  & 
OLD  MADRAS  ROAD
Yeshwanthpura -IISC -Mekri  circle -
Jayamahal -St John  Church  road -Ulsoor  
lake-Old Madras  Road  -KR PuramC 02
Page 3263-273
Anand  Rao Flyover  
Extension .
Proposed  Continuation  of Ananda  Rao 
Circle  flyover  up to K.R. Circle  towards  
Nrupatunga  roadC 06
Page 274-316
HOSUR   ROAD
 Extension  of Existing  Madiwala  
underpass  till Traffic  police  station  
junction .C 07Page 403-418
MARAENAHALLI  PIPE  LINE  
ROAD
Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  from  Maraenahalli  
main  road   from  Ragi  Gudda  to 7th main  
junction  thereby  connecting  Kanakapura  main  
road  till Thalghattapura  Nice  road  via Pipe  Line  
road .C 12
Page 330-378
MYSURU  ROAD
Proposed  Elevated  corridor  from  
Sirsi  Circle  to Nayandahalli  on 
Mysuru  roadC 09
Page 379-390
HOSUR  ROAD  TO OLD  
MADRAS  ROAD
Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  from  
Old Madras  Road  from   Swami  
Vivekananda  Metro  Station  to Silk 
Board  Junction  on Hosur  road   via 
Indiranagar -Domlur - MadiwalaC 10Page 391-402
THANISANDRA  MAIN  ROAD
Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  from  Nagawara  
junction -Ramakrishna  HedgedeNagar  Junction -
Sampigehalli -Tirumenahalli -Bellahalli  junction -
Bagalur  main  roadC 11
Page 419-428
HENNUR  – BAGLUR  MAIN  
ROAD
Proposed  Additional  link road  to KIA,  Elevated  
Corridor   from  Outer  Ring  Road  – Hennur  main  
road  junction  to Bagalur  Junction .C 13Page 3117-329
HOSUR   ROAD
 Elevated  Corridor  from  Hosur  Road  
from  Shoolay  circle  – Vellara  junction  -
Anepalya  Junction -Adugodi  Junction -
Forum  junction -St.John  Chruch  
junction -Madiwala  junction -Silk board  
Junction .C 08
Page 249-262
KANAKAPURA  ROAD
Proposed  Underpass  at Adayar  Ananda  
Bhavan,  Raghuvanahalli,  Kanakapura  
Road .C 05
Page 501-526
K.R.PURAM TO  
NAYANDAHALLI
Proposed  East- West  Tunnel  Corridor  from  K. R. 
Puram  to NayandahalliT 02Page 527-567
TRAVEL  DEMAND  
MODEL  REPORT07
Page 568-601
ENVIRONMENTAL  
IMPACT  ASSESSMENT08
Page 602-627
CONCLUSIONS09
6Page 470-500
HEBBAL  TO SILKBOARD
Proposed  North  – South  Tunnel  Corridor  from  
Hebbal  to Silk BoardT 01Page 439-448
YELAHANKA  NEW  
TOWN  MAIN  ROAD
Proposed   Elevated  corridor  from  
Yelahanka  New  Town  to 
Kempegowda  International  Airport  
road .C 15Page 429-438
TANNERY  ROAD
Proposed   Elevated  corridor  from  
Madava  Mudiliyar  road  to Nagawara  
JunctionC 14
Page 464-469
MOHAN  KUMAR  ROAD
Proposed  Double -Decker  Corridor  in 
collaboration  with  Indian  Railways,  connecting  
the BEL Road  intersection  to the rear side of 
Yeshwanthpur  Railway  Station .DD 02
Page 455-463
MAGADI  ROAD
Double  Decker  Elevated  corridor  with  Metro  line  from  
Hosahalli  to Kadabagere  cross  along  Magadi  road  crossing  
ORR  and NICE  corridor .DD 01Page 449-454
WEST  OF CHORD  ROAD
Proposed   Elevated  corridor  from  
West  of Chord  Road  to Outer  Ring  
road  via Pipe  Line  road  (Nandini  
Layout) .C 16Proposed Tunnels
INTEGRATED  DOUBLE DECKER
WITH METROINTEGRATED  DOUBLE DECKER
WITH INDIAN RAILWAYS
Reference:
1. CMP  - 2020  for Bangalore
2. BBMP  reports
3. BMRCL  Data  / Reports
4. RTO  Data
5. Secondary  data from  various  
         Traffic  & Transportation  Studies . 
6.      Highway   Capacity  Manual  –HCM
7.      IRC 99-2018
8.      RC -106 -1990
01 .  
Project 
Background
CHAPTER 1 -STUDY AREA
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan Introduction
Figure 1. Bengaluru city skyline
Figure 2. Bengaluru City Night viewBengaluru,  the largest  city ofKarnataka  and the third most  populous  city in the country  
has an estimated  population  of over  10 million . 
The city is also known  as the "Silicon  Valley  of India"  (or "IT capital  of India")  because  of 
its role as the nation's  leading  IT exporter .
It also headquarters  technological  organisations like ISRO,  NAL  and HAL  and is home  
to many  educational  and research  institutions  such  asIISc, IIMB, IIITB, NIFT,  NID -R&D  
Campus, NLSIU  and NIMHANS . 
As a growing  metropolitan  city, Bengaluru  confronts  problems  with  unplanned  
expansion  of the city to accommodate  the huge  influx  of the people  every  year  leading  to 
serpentine  traffic  jams  on major  corridors  every  day.
The resultant  pressure  on road  spaces  is very  high,  and traffic  conditions  are increasingly  
difficult .Bengaluru Today
Figure 4. The rapid growth of Bengaluru against other major cities in India
The city of Bengaluru  houses  a population  of over  10 million   (Figure  3) with  about  2 
million  migrant  workers  (4,378 people  per square  km),  ranking  it as the third  most  
populous  city in India . This  accounts  to a 46.48 % (Figure  4) jump  in the population  in 
the decadal  population  growth  rate in India . Demographics
Figure 3. The Population of 
Bengaluru
Source: Directorate of Economics and Statistics/ Census 2011 
Vehicular Registrations
According  to the Bengaluru  Traffic  Police  (Figure  5), there  is one vehicle  for every  two 
people  on the roads  of the city. This  is the resultant  of about  82,53,218 number  of 
vehicles  registered  in Bengaluru  (15,72,185 cars and 57,30,388 two wheelers .). It is 
estimated  that by 2022 , there  would  be more  than  one Crore  vehicles  seen  on the road  
network  of Bengaluru .
The increased  number  of vehicles  on roads  in Bengaluru  has resulted  in an average  
vehicular  speed  10 - 15.5 Km (peak  hour) . Thus,  Bengaluru  has been  ranked  third  
behind  Patna  and Kolkata  in the slowest  moving  traffic  in the country . (Source : Ola 
Ease  of Moving  Report) . 
Figure 5. Vehicular Statistics of Bengaluru. (Source: Karnataka Transport 
Department)
8
Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation (BMTC):
As Bengaluru’s  roads  become  more  and more  congested,  the role of public  transport  
becomes  increasingly  important . The public  transport  in the city has in the past seen  
rapid  and dramatic  improvement,  with  a comprehensive  network  of bus services  
providing  high  level  of access  to work,  education,  centres  of retail  and centres  of 
recreation  to meet  the growing  travel  demand . 
BMTC  is the sole public  bus transport  provider  for Bengaluru,  serving  urban,  sub-urban  
and rural  areas . This  network  was built  with  a vision  of providing  safe,  reliable,  quality  
service  and choice  option  to the residents  of the city over  a period  of 20 years,  with  a 
constant  involvement  and partnership  between  the urban  local  governments . Road Network
Figure 6. Typical Morning Peak Hour Traffic from Bengaluru Traffic Police WebsiteBengaluru  is endowed  with  a radial  pattern  of road  network  converging  in the core area 
of the city. The total  road  network  of the city is about  4000  km of which  arterial/sub -
arterial  roads  account  for about  350 km. The road  network  in the central  parts  of the city 
has developed  organically  over  the last few centuries  and has inadequate  right -of-way . 
There  is also a ring road  which  cuts across  the various  radial  roads . 
The National Highways which pass through Bengaluru include:
•NH – 4 connecting Pune and Chennai 
•NH – 7 connecting Varanasi and Kanyakumari 
•NH – 209 connecting  Dindigul  / Pollachi  
The following are the State Highways in Bengaluru: 
•SH – 17 connecting Mysore and Gundlupet 
•SH – 17E connecting T G Halli 
•SH – 19 connecting  Hindupur  via Yelahanka  & Doddaballapur  
•SH – 86 connecting Mysore via Kanakapura
Some  of the primary  traffic  bottlenecks  in the city of Bengaluru  happen  at major,  crucial  
junctions/  stretches  in the core of the city. Figure  6 above  represents  the typical  peak  
hour  traffic  congestion  on the road  network  as extracted  from  the Google  maps  traffic . It 
could  be observed  that the western  part of the city is relatively  lesser  congested  
compared  to the central  zones .Accident Statistics
The road  accidents  in the city of Bengaluru  are as presented  below  in Figure  7. Despite  
road  fatalities  being  reduced,  the non-fatal  accidents  contribute  to a significant  number . 
The reasons  include  poor  road  condition,  poor  lighting,  poor  junction  design,  etc. The 
alarming  reality  is the vulnerable  users  who  are victims  in the accidents  caused . This  also 
relates  to the high  dependency  of commuters  on private  transport  over  public  transport .
Figure 7. Accident Statistics of Bengaluru (Source: Bengaluru Traffic Police)
Public Transport
The two prominent  public  transport  services  in Bengaluru  are the buses  operated  by 
Bangalore  Metropolitan  Transport  Corporation  (BMTC)  and the metro,  operated  by 
Bangalore  Metro  Rail Corporation  Limited  (BMRCL) . 
The silent  features  of the two public  transport  systems  are presented  in the sections  below :CHAPTER 1 -STUDY AREA
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
9
Figure 8. BMTC Service Coverage (Source: BMTC)
However,  over  the past few years,  the performance  of the public  transport  in the 
city has been  reducing  attributing  to various  reasons,  which  are both  internal  and 
external  to PT operator . Over  the years,  the performance  of fleet  with  reference  to 
cancellation  of service,  effective  kilometres,  KMPL,  etc. has been  slowly  
declining . 
Some  of the notable  points  with  respect  to BMTC  operations  are listed  below  .
•BMTC  has a fleet  size of around  6,513 buses  which  are currently  catering  to 
about  35.8 Lakh  passengers  per day. 
• The effective  kilometre  per day is 11.2 Lakhs  with  a cancellation  rate of 
11.9% recorded  in year  2019 -20. 
• The average  speed  of the buses  during  peak  hours  is less than  10kmph  on 
many  major  corridors  
 The share of public transport has been reduced from 35% to 27% over the years 
with increase in private vehicular trips.Considering  the future  developments  in the city, it is absolutely  necessary  that 
the spine  of the city i.e. the public  transport  needs  to be integrated  with  other  
modes  of transport  encouraging  seamless  travel  with  limited  or no externalities  
with  the active  involvement  of the local  governments,  if Bengaluru  is to remain  
a successful  and vibrant  cosmopolitan  that it is
Bangalore  Metro  Rail  Corporation  Limited  (BMRCL)
Bangalore  Metro  Rail Corporation  Limited  (BMRCL)  is a joint  venture  of 
Government  of India  and the Government  of Karnataka . It is the city’s  most  
significant  investment  to-date  in providing  a lifeline  for the city’s  constrained  
and congested  roadways . The metro  system  is designed  for a maximum  train  
speed  of 80 km/hr . but the trains  are allowed  to commercially  run at a speed  of 
not more  than  67.50 km/hr .
The high  capacity  mass  transit  mode  offers  two trunk  routes - Purple  Line  
(Baiyyappanahalli  - Mysore  Road)  and Green  Line  (Nagsandra  - 
Yelechanahalli)  in Phase  I that is currently  operational . A total  of 42.3 km of 
metro  services  are operational . These  services  operate  at a headway  of 3-4 min 
with  an estimated  travel  time  of 30-45 min. The metro  line alignment  is as 
represented  below  in Figure  9:
Figure 9. BMRCL Service  Coverage (Operational + Proposed) (Source: BMRCL)The service  coverage  of BMTC  buses  is as shown  below  in Figure  8:CHAPTER 1 -STUDY AREA
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
10
The Bruhat  Bengaluru  Mahanagara  Palike  (BBMP)  is the governing  body  responsible  for managing  civic  amenities  and some  infrastructural  assets  
within  the Greater  Bengaluru  metropolitan  area . As India's  fourth -largest  Municipal  Corporation,  it oversees  a population  of 8.4 million  across  a 
741 km² area . Over  the past six decades,  its jurisdiction  has expanded  more  than  tenfold .
BBMP's  key responsibilities  include  ensuring  the "orderly  development  of the city"  through  tasks  like road  development,  zoning,  building  
regulations,  public  health,  hygiene,  licensing,  trade,  and education . It also addresses  issues  related  to quality  of life, such  as managing  public  
spaces,  parks,  water  bodies,  and greenery .
BBMP  functions  as the third  tier of government,  below  the Central  and State  governments . Additionally,  other  statutory  authorities  like the 
Bangalore  Development  Authority  and BESCOM  share  some  municipal  duties .
Bengaluru  has around  1,920 km of arterial  and sub-arterial  roads . The BBMP  is tasked  with  the development  and maintenance  of these  
infrastructural  assets,  playing  a key role in the city's  improvement . The Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) 
CHAPTER 1 -STUDY AREA
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
Figure 10. Ward Map of BBMP Bangalore 11
Project  Initiation by BBMP
Bengaluru  has struggled  to balance  the increasing  population  and vehicular  growth  with  adequate  infrastructure  development . As a result,  the city faces  
worsening  traffic  congestion,  extended  travel  times,  and low public  transport  usage . The aim of the current  study  is to propose  long -term,  sustainable  solutions  
to improve  traffic  flow  in Bengaluru . These  interventions  must  be flexible  and adaptable  to the evolving  travel  patterns,  fostering  public  engagement,  and 
seeking  innovative  approaches  to tackle  emerging  challenges . Public  transport  needs  to move  beyond  conventional  methods,  offering  diverse  alternatives  to 
private  vehicle  usage  and integrating  multiple  modes  of transport  efficiently .
The city's  traffic  congestion  stems  from  a combination  of excessive  vehicle  numbers  and insufficient  infrastructure,  aggravated  by inadequate  urban  planning . 
The most  effective  solution  is to alleviate  traffic  congestion  through  continuous  infrastructure  development  projects  such  as elevated  corridors,  tunnels,  
underpasses,  and flyovers .  While  the expansion  of public  transport  via BMTC  buses  and Metro  systems  has been  implemented,  traffic  congestion  continues  to 
rise. This  growing  issue  has earned  Bengaluru  the title of the most  congested  city in terms  of traffic . In response,  the BBMP  has taken  this matter  seriously  and is 
preparing  a comprehensive  Traffic  Management  Plan . This  plan  aims  to provide  seamless,  congestion -free mobility  both  within  and across  the city, aligning  
with  the National  Urban  Transport  Policy  (NUTP)  and addressing  long -term  solutions
Objectives of Study
The Bengaluru  Comprehensive  Traffic  Management  Plan  is designed  to enhance  
mobility,  accessibility,  convenience,  and comfort  for all road  users,  including  public  
transport,  private  transport,  commercial  transport   and non-motorized  transport  
(NMT)  users . The key objectives  of the study  include :
▪Evaluating  the current  road  infrastructure  in the identified  corridors,  identifying  
areas  for improvement,  and ensuring  seamless  travel  in terms  of connectivity,  
safety,  and convenience .
▪Developing  a plan  to support  the mobility  of public  transport  users,  pedestrians,  
and cyclists .
▪Proposing  actionable  interventions  and creating  conceptual -level  designs  to 
improve  mobility  along  the major  corridors .
▪Assessing  the roads  provided  by BBMP  to determine  suitability  for infrastructure  
solutions  like elevated  expressways  or tunnels  and underpasses .Scope of Work
The development  of the Bengaluru  Comprehensive  Traffic  Management  Plan  
includes  the following  key tasks : The study  aims  to propose  strategies  and plans  that 
can be implemented  long  term  solutions  to achieve  seamless  traffic  flow  
The primary  focus  is on reducing  travel  times  by addressing  traffic  conflicts  at 
junctions  and other  bottleneck  areas,  with  particular  attention  on improving  the 
speeds  of public  buses,  cars,  and other  transport  modes .
The plans  will prioritize  enhancing  road  speeds,  reducing  congestion,  and ensuring  
pedestrian  safety  while  improving  access  to public  transport  , private  vehicles  and 
NMT .
The broad  scope  of work  includes :
➢Developing  actionable  solutions  and strategies  for corridor  and area 
improvements . 
➢Proposing  seamless  travel  solutions  such  as elevated  corridors,  tunnels,  and 
underpasses .
➢Creating  conceptual  designs  for these  interventions  if necessary .
➢Ensuring  that proposed  solutions  are supported  by traffic  data,  statistics,  and 
model  run analysis  from  the  Transport  Model .CHAPTER 1 -STUDY AREA
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
12
CHAPTER 1 - BACKGROUND
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan Sl. No Corridor Length
1Bellary Road - Old madras road corridor :From Esteem Mall Junction to Mekri  circle to Miller 
Road, Kensington Road, Murphy Road to Old Madras Road14 kms
2 Bellary Road – From Mekri  Circle to Chalukya  Circle 7kms
3 Old Madras Road – From Trinity Circle to Hope farm via Budigere  and K R puram 25 kms
4Old Airport Road – From ASC junction to Yamalur
Junction18 kms
5 Sarjapura  Road - From Hosur Road Junction to sarjapur 10 kms
6 Hosur Road –From Bellara Junction to Silkbord  junction 6 kms
7 Bannergatta  Road - from ORR junction to Bannerugatta  Road BBMP limits 15 kms
8 Mysore Road -From Sirsi  circle to NICE road 10 kms
9 Magadi Road -From Leprocy  junction to NICE road 12 kms
10 Tumkur  Road - From Yeshwanthpura  junction to Tumkur  road BBMP limits 10 kms
Outer Ring Road
11 Goragunte Palya to K R Puram 18
12 K R Puram to Silk Board 16
13 Silk Board to Mysore Road 12
Total 190Corridors  to be studied as per Scope of Work
Note: The corridors listed above are not finalized. Based on the feasibility report, additional corridors may be 
included, or some may be removed from the list.Table 1. Proposed Corridors as per RFP to take up the Travel Demand assessment
13
CHAPTER 1 -STUDY AREA
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TaskCorridor Improvement Plan
Quantity 190 kms of corridors
Task 1 Baseline Scenario
Task 2 Primary Survey and Data Analysis
Task 4 Transport Demand  Model Output
Task 5Alignment Details / Conceptual 
Drawings
Deliverables :
•Feasibility study and technical assessments.
•Model out put report with respect to Transport Model.
•Route design and engineering blueprints.
• Block Cost estimates and budget plan.
•Environmental and stakeholder impact reports.
•Final conceptual proposal documents and presentation.Deliverables :
Figure 11. Map showing the Study Area
14

02 .   
Study Area
Study Area
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan CHAPTER 1 -STUDY AREA
Figure 12. Map showing the Study Area16
Proposed Study Area Profile
The overall  aim of the project  is to study  and prepare  a long  term  Seamless  mobility  plan  for selected  corridors  within  the city of Bengaluru  
as shown  below  in Figure  10. 
Integrated Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan  
Twenty  Three  (23) Long  term  projects  where  identified  on the corridors  mentioned  in the below  Table  no 2 & 3. these  include  important  arterials  
that carry  significant  traffic  and mass  transit  services  along  the RoW  like buses  and metro
Table 2:  Proposed Corridors in the Study Area after  the site reconnaissance Surveys 
5Sl. No Corridor Length  kms
1 Split Flyover at MEI Junction 0.5
2Yeshwanthpura  ( Mathikere  cross) -IISC -Mekri  circle -Jayamahal -St John Church road -Ulsoor lake -Old 
Madras Road -KR Puram.27
3Integrated Elevation from Hudson Circle to Minarva  Circle ( Minavara  Circle, Bharat -Talks, Shivaji 
Talkies, Town Hall, LIC, Halasuru  Police Station, Hudson Circle, Cubbon  Park)2.7
4Proposed flyover / Underpass at Konankuntae Cross for Through Traffic from Kanakapura to 
Banashankari0.9
5 Proposed  Flyover  at Adayar  Ananda  Bhavan,  Raghuvanahalli , Kanakapura  Road 0.8
6 Proposed  Continuation  of Ananda  Rao Circle  flyover  up to K.R. Circle  towards  Nrupatunga  road 1.7
7 Extension of Existing Madiwala  underpass till Traffic police station junction 0.5
8Elevated Corridor from Hosur Road from Shoolay  circle – Vellara  junction -Anepalya  Junction -
Adugodi  Junction -Forum junction -St.John  Chruch  junction -Madiwala  junction -Silk board Junction7.4
9 Proposed Elevated corridor from Sirsi  Circle to Nayandahalli on Mysuru road 3.5
10Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  from  Old Madras  Road  from   Swami  Vivekananda  Metro  Station  to Silk 
Board  Junction  on Hosur  road   via Indiranagar -Domlur - Madiwala10
11Proposed Elevated Corridor from Nagawara  junction -Ramakrishna HedgedeNagar  Junction -
Sampigehalli -Tirumenahalli -Bellahalli  junction -Bagalur  main road15
12Proposed Elevated Corridor from Maraenahalli main road  from Ragi Gudda to 7th main junction 
thereby connecting Kanakapura main road till Thalghattapura  Nice road via Pipe Line road.10.5
13Proposed  Additional  link road  to KIA,  Elevated  Corridor   from  Outer  Ring Road – Hennur  main  road  
junction  to Bagalur  Junction
 15
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan CHAPTER 1 -STUDY AREA
17
5Sl. No` Corridor Length  Kms
14 Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  along  Tannery  road  from  Madava  Mudiliyar  road  to Nagawara  Junction . 5.5
15 Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  from  Yelahanka  New  town  to Kempegowda  International  Airport  Road 4
16Proposed   Elevated  corridor  from  West  of Chord  Road  to Outer  Ring  road  via Pipe  Line  road  (Nandini  
Layout) .4.5
DD1Proposed Double Decker Elevated corridor with Metro line  from Hosahalli to Kadabagere  cross along 
Magadi road crossing ORR and NICE corridor.13
DD2Proposed Double -Decker Corridor in collaboration with Indian Railways, connecting the BEL Road 
intersection to the rear side of Yeshwanthpur Railway Station via Mohan Kumar Road.2.2
T1 Proposed  North  – South  Tunnel  Corridor  from  Hebbal  to Silk Board 18
T2 Proposed  East- West  Tunnel  Corridor  from  K. R. Puram  (I.T.I  Colony)  to Nayandahalli  NICE  intersection 28
Total Length 170.7
Total Length of Tunnels 46
Total length of Elevated corridors/ Double Deckers/ Underpasses 124.7
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan CHAPTER 1 -STUDY AREATable 3:  Proposed Corridors in the Study Area after  the site reconnaissance Surveys 
18
03 . 
Methodology
Methodology
Approach
Increasing  traffic  volumes  and the associated  adverse  impacts  on congestion  and air quality  are key problems  in Bengaluru  and elsewhere  in 
India  and this situation  is likely  to deteriorate  further . 
The need,  therefore  is to find solutions  that can meet  people’s  desire  to travel,  by creating  a long  term  Mobility  plan  that includes  Elevated  
corridors,  Tunnels  and Underpasses  and basic  junction  corrections  if required . 
‘The  Comprehensive  approach  to have  a seamless  traffic  movement  plan  seeks  to develop  a most  optimal  transport  road  map  keeping  in view  to 
decongest  the traffic  at all the major  corridors  and over  passing  the most  congested  junctions  in the city by way  of providing  elevated  corridors,  
Under  passes  and tunnels’  This  can be achieved  by striving  to improve  the mobility  of buses,  private  vehicles  and commercial  vehicles,  thereby  
increasing  their  speeds  on the road  network  of Bengaluru .
As a prerequisite,  we would  collect  all relevant  data  very  systematically  to understand  the present  quantum  of traffic  and bottlenecks  and 
challenges  to the free movement  of vehicles  on the main  corridors .  
Solutions  to transport  improvement  are not unique .  A number  of 
parallel  strategies  need  to be considered . The road  improvement,  the 
public  transport  facilities  improvement,  parking  management,  traffic  
management,  pedestrian  movement  and facilities,  cycling  facilities  
etc. must  all be tackled  in one go to achieve  results  that would  meet  
the desired  goal . Apart  from  this,  we will also consider  demand  
management  strategies  to reduce  congestion  on the road  network .
While  working  on solutions,  we will collect  all earlier  ideas  and plans  
and review  these  proposals  in the light  of the present  study  aimed  at 
the specific  strategy  under  evaluation  and come  out with  a list of 
possible  and practical  interventions .
Hence  the outcome  of the study  will include  Long  term  permanent  
solutions  for seamless  traffic  movement  within  the city. Projects  such  
as junction  improvement  plans,  street  improvement,  parking  
improvement,  circulation  plans  etc. can be taken  up as per the 
Transport  Demand  Model .
The Stakeholders  will be consulted  at each  stage  of the project  to 
make  the outcome  of the Study  more  beneficial  to its users
CHAPTER 3 - METHODOLOGY
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
Figure 13. Map showing the Study Area20
Methodology Adopted
The objective  of the study  is to improve  the average  speeds  on the corridors  by providing  long  term  solutions  . The corridors  shall  also provide  
enhanced  safety  for pedestrian  movements  at bus stands/stations,  metro  stations,  and around  major  activity  centres  along  the corridors . The study  
also focuses  on long  term   seamless  traffic  movement  for Bangalore  city by proposing  Integrated   Elevated  corridor,  Underpasses  and Tunnels . The 
proposed  methodology  is as illustrated  below  in Figure  12.
The consultant  shall  establish  the baseline  for current  corridor  characteristics  by means  of Site Visits  and Reconnaissance  Survey . Apart  from  this 
the consultant  has also undertake ;
•Photo  Documentation  of the Corridors/Routes  and Critical  Area/Stretches
•Interactions  with  the Officials  and Stakeholders  to identify  gaps  and challenges
•Review  of previous  documents  pertaining  to the locations  along  the corridors/routes/stretches .
•The consultant  has presented  the major  issues,  opportunities  and concerns  observed  and outline  the broad  strategies  to guide  the rest of the 
study .Task  1: Baseline  ScenarioComprehensive Traffic Management Plan 
Primary Surveys
Road Inventory
Speed & Delay
Classified Traffic 
Volume Counts
O-D SurveysSecondary Data
Existing Studies
Reports with 
Relevant Data
Topographical 
Surveys Data (if 
Available)
Geo Technical 
Surveys for Tunnel 
SectionsProject Output
Seamless Travel 
Interventions
1.Elevated Corridors 
2.Underpasses
3.Tunnel proposal
Preparation of Concept Plan
Transport Demand Model Preparation of Block Cost CHAPTER 3 - METHODOLOGY
Figure 14. Pie Chart Showing the Traffic Management Plan details
21 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
The consultant  shall  collect  all relevant  data  by means  of Surveys . The team  will conduct  the following  surveys,  as deemed  necessary  for the 
study ;
•Road  Network  Inventory  
•Junction  Inventory  – covering  Geometric  designs  etc.
•Speed  and Delay  Surveys
•Classified  Traffic  Volume  Counts  at critical  locations  
Based  on the data  collected  from  the primary  surveys  and secondary  sources,  the team  has done  the data  analysis  for the following  assessments  
•Assessment  of the Traffic  Volumes  as per IRC Guidelines  or any other  similar  guidelines .
•Traffic  Volume   Assessment  base  year
•Establishment  of level  of service  of individual  corridors .
•Traffic  Impact  Assessment  based  on projections  for 25 years .
The various  assessments  undertaken  as part of this task has identified  the critical  gaps  and challenges  along  the corridor,  which  will be used  as 
inputs  for formulating  the strategies  and interventions  for the Corridor  Improvement .
Figure 15. Task 2 – Survey and Data AnalysisTask 2 - Survey & Data Analysis
Transport Demand ModelJunction Volume counts
Speed & Delay SurveysSite Reconnaissance 
▪ Carriageway Width
▪ Existing Corridor Cross Section
▪ Encroachments on corridors
▪ Traffic Volume Assessments
▪ Establishment of Level of Service
▪ Level of Congestion & throughput.Task  2: Primary  Survey  and Data  Analysis  CHAPTER 3 - METHODOLOGY
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
22
Consultants  have  identified  all the appropriate  implementable  
Interventions  for Corridor  Improvements  considering  equitable  Road  
Spaces  for all Modes  of Transport  
➢ Road  Improvement  Plan  and Circulation  Plans  as deemed  necessary ; 
including :
•Road  Markings  and Signage
•Junction  Improvement  
•Turning  movement  controlsCHAPTER 3 - METHODOLOGY
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan Task  3: Corridor  Improvement  Solutions  (Figure  14.)
➢ Parking  Management  Plan ; including
•Parking  restrictions  or bans
➢ Road  Safety  measures  like
•Traffic  engineering  measures  – Geometric  Design  Corrections
•Traffic  Calming  Measures  
•Black  Spot  Corrections  if any
Road Improvement Plan 
Seamless Traffic Movement plan
 
Conceptual Elevated corridor 
plans 
Conceptual plan of proposed 
Tunnel▪Land Acquisition details
▪Location of Up ramps & Down ramps
▪Integration plan of Elevated corridors.
▪Integration plan of Tunnels
▪Integration of Underpasses
▪Safe Pedestrian Access plan 
▪Impact Assessment of all the proposed 
Elevated corridors, Tunnels & 
Underpasses using Transport Model
▪Block cost estimation
▪Financial Model
Conceptual plan of proposed 
Under passesCorridor Improvement Solutions 
All the critical  proposals  has been  discussed  with  the stakeholders  and conceptual  drawings  have  been  prepared  by the Consultant .Task  4: Conceptual  DrawingsFigure 16. Task 3 Chart showing the Corridor Improvement Solutions approach
23
04 . 
Primary 
Surveys
Primary Surveys
In any transport  planning  exercise,  data  collection  is the cornerstone  and the very  foundation  on which  rests  the super  structure  of 
planning . The data  is used  to analyse  the existing  transport  and traffic  situation  in the study  area. The activity  is undertaken  to understand  
traffic  and travel  characteristics  along  the corridor  and highlight  corridor  specific  problems .
The following  surveys  have  been  carried  out for the Comprehensive  Traffic  Management  Plan . 
Road Inventory Surveys
A full-scale  inventory  survey  was undertaken  to create  a road  network  database . Inventories  of the following  facilities  were  carried  out as 
part of the task.
•Road  Network
•Effective  Road  width
•Quality  of riding  surface
•Adjoining  Land  use and available  Access  control
•Intersection  Facilities
•Pedestrian  Facilities
•Parking  Facilities
•Traffic  Control/management  Measures  like one –ways
Accordingly,  road  inventory  survey  was done  for the entire  corridor . 
Intersection Turning Volume
Survey  Location : Critical  junctions  and mid-block  points  along  the corridor . 
Objective : Surveys  were  conducted  at the identified  critical  intersections . The data  will help  in realizing  the seriousness  of problem  at the 
intersection,  critical  movements,  etc. 
Conduct : Video  graphic  counts  were  carried  out along  the corridor . Volume  counts  were  carried  out on a typical  working  day for 6 hours  
covering  both  morning  and evening  peak  periods . 
Data  Entry  and Analysis : The traffic  data  collected  from  the field  were  scrutinized  and processed .  The Passenger  Car Unit  (PCU)  values  
recommended  by Indian  Roads  Congress  (IRC)  are used  in the traffic  volume  analysis .  
Key Outputs :
•Peak  Hour  Volume  at critical  junctions  (Veh./Hr. and PCU/ Hr)
•Traffic  by Vehicle  type  and hourly  distribution  of Traffic
•Identification  of critical  locations  for pedestrian/Non -motorized  vehicles  movement  Pedestrian  Risk  Zones
•Finalization  of potential  sites  for safe pedestrian  crossing  facilities
•Identification  of needs  of NMT  users  and their  opinion  on exclusive  NMT  track
•Identification  of traffic  related  issues  at the junctionCHAPTER 4 – PRIMARY SURVEYS
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
25
Speed and Delay Survey
Objective : The principle  objective  of the survey  is to find out the running  speed,  journey  speed  and types  of delay  such  as stopped  delay  
and operational  delay  to evaluate  the level  of service  or quality  of traffic  flow  of a road  or entire  road  network  system . 
Conduct : There  are several  methods  available  for conducting  this type  of survey . Few of the methods  are; moving  observer  method,  
registration  number  plate  method  and Elevated  observer  method . Floating  car method  is widely  used  in India . The enumerators  record  the 
distance  and time  of travel  between  two junctions  and stopping  time  of the vehicle  along  the road  stretches,  at intersections  and the reasons  
for the same . 
Key outputs :
•Travel  and journey  speeds  along  the corridors . 
•Delays  along  each  of the selected  corridors  by type/reason
•Intersection  delay
Traffic Signal Phasing
Survey  Location : Traffic  Signal  details  in terms  of phasing  were  collected  during  peak  and off peak  hours . 
Objective : The principal  objective  of the study  is to assess  the operational  efficiency  of the signal  along  with  checking  of availability  of pedestrian  
signal .
 
Conduct : Conduct  the survey  for both  peak  and off peak  hours . The survey  would  estimate  the number  of phases  along  with  the signal  
phasing  time . Information  on if the signal  is under  surveillance,  signal  being  manual  or automated  shall  also be collected . 
Key Outputs : 
•Signal  operational  efficiency .
•Delay
•Pedestrian  only  phase .
8CHAPTER 4 – PRIMARY SURVEYS
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
26
Origin & Destination Surveys
Objective : The principle  objective  of the survey  is to find out the running  speed,  journey  speed  and types  of delay  such  as stopped  delay  
and operational  delay  to evaluate  the level  of service  or quality  of traffic  flow  of a road  or entire  road  network  system . 
Conduct : There  are several  methods  available  for conducting  this type  of survey . Few of the methods  are; moving  observer  method,  
registration  number  plate  method  and Elevated  observer  method . Floating  car method  is widely  used  in India . The enumerators  record  the 
distance  and time  of travel  between  two junctions  and stopping  time  of the vehicle  along  the road  stretches,  at intersections  and the reasons  
for the same . 
Key outputs :
•Travel  and journey  speeds  along  the corridors . 
•Delays  along  each  of the selected  corridors  by type/reason
•Intersection  delay
Household Surveys
Survey  Location : Traffic  Signal  details  in terms  of phasing  were  collected  during  peak  and off peak  hours . 
Objective : The principal  objective  of the study  is to assess  the operational  efficiency  of the signal  along  with  checking  of availability  of 
pedestrian  signal .
 
Conduct : Conduct  the survey  for both  peak  and off peak  hours . The survey  would  estimate  the number  of phases  along  with  the signal  
phasing  time . Information  on if the signal  is under  surveillance,  signal  being  manual  or automated  shall  also be collected . 
Key Outputs : 
•Signal  operational  efficiency .
•Delay
•Pedestrian  only  phase .CHAPTER 4 – PRIMARY SURVEYS
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
27
05 . 
Travel 
Demand 
Model
Approach to Modelling for 
Proposed Elevated 
Corridors, Tunnels & 
Underpasses 
Travel Demand Model
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  PlanGenesis of the model 
•A transportation  model  was initially  created  as part of the 2015  Revision  of the Master  Plan .
•In 2019 , the model  was updated  with  fresh  primary  data  during  the development  of the Comprehensive  Mobility  Plan  
(CMP) .
•Further  updates  were  made  in 2023 , incorporating  new  traffic  volume  counts  and origin -destination  (OD)  surveys,  
specifically  to project  demand  for Metro  Line  3A.
•This  study  employs  the updated  model  to forecast  traffic  on planned  elevated  corridors  in Bangalore . 
Salient features of the Transportation Model
▪The road  network  was developed  in GIS with  high  accuracy,  covering  over  3,000 kilometers  of major  roads .
▪Link  attributes,  such  as the number  of lanes,  capacity,  and type,  are included  in the coding  of the model’s  15,500 links .
▪Speed -flow  curves  have  been  calibrated  for eight  different  carriageway  configurations .
▪The model  uses  a detailed  zone  system  with  534 zones . All BMTC  bus routes  have  been  considered  in the model  with  also consideration  
of the fare structure  for the Volvo  and ordinary  routes .
▪The Metro  being  developed  through  various  phases  over  the years  to follow  has also been  carefully  considered  in the forecast  network . 
▪The metro  line phase -I and Phase -II has been  considered  in the base  year  2031  and all other  proposed  metro  lines  have  been  coded  and 
run for the years  2041  and 2051 .
▪All the proposed  Elevated  Corridors  and Tunnel  alignment  is also coded  into the model .
Figure 17. Road Network of Bangalore City coded in Cube Software 29
Travel Demand Model
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan▪ .
Cube (Modeling Software)
 State -of-Art Software
 Highway & Public Transit  Modeling
 Doubly Constrained Gravity Model 
Transportation System
 15000 Links
 6000 Bus Routes
 534 Zones
 Metro (all phases)
Travel Demand (Mode -wise O -D)
  Public Transit
  Car
  Two Wheeler
  Auto Rickshaw
Model Runs:
 Yr 2024 base (validated & 
calibrated)
 Yr 2031,2041,2051 and 2061Transport Model Structure
Bangalore
Transport SystemBangalore
Travel Demand Pattern
From Prior Model
Calibration 
functionsForecast 
NetworksAssignment
Assigned flows on Elevated LinksTransport Demand Model
Figure 18 Flow Chart Showing Transport Model Structure
30
Travel Demand Model
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  PlanList of proposed Elevated Corridors, Tunnels and Underpasses
Table 4:  List of Corridors coded in the Transport Model of Bangalore
31Sl. No Corridor Length  kms
1Split Flyover at MEI Junction 0.5
2Yeshwanthpura  ( Mathikere  cross) -IISC -Mekri  circle -
Jayamahal -St John Church road -Ulsoor lake -Old Madras 
Road -KR Puram.27
3Integrated Elevation from Hudson Circle to Minarva  Circle 
(Minavara  Circle, Bharat -Talks, Shivaji Talkies, Town Hall, 
LIC, Halasuru  Police Station, Hudson Circle, Cubbon  Park)2.7
4Proposed flyover / Underpass at Konankuntae Cross for 
Through Traffic from Kanakapura to Banashankari0.9
5Proposed  Flyover  at Adayar  Ananda  Bhavan,  
Raghuvanahalli , Kanakapura  Road0.8
6Proposed  Continuation  of Ananda  Rao Circle  flyover  up to 
K.R. Circle  towards  Nrupatunga  road1.7
7Extension of Existing Madiwala  underpass till Traffic police 
station junction0.5
8Elevated Corridor from Hosur Road from Shoolay  circle – 
Vellara  junction -Anepalya  Junction -Adugodi  Junction -
Forum junction -St.John  Chruch  junction -Madiwala  junction -
Silk board Junction7.4
9Proposed Elevated corridor from Sirsi  Circle to 
Nayandahalli on Mysuru road3.5
10Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  from  Old Madras  Road  from   
Swami  Vivekananda  Metro  Station  to Silk Board  Junction  on 
Hosur  road   via Indiranagar -Domlur - Madiwala10
11Proposed Elevated Corridor from Nagawara  junction -
Ramakrishna HedgedeNagar  Junction -Sampigehalli -
Tirumenahalli -Bellahalli  junction -Bagalur  main road15
12Proposed Elevated Corridor from Maraenahalli main road  
from Ragi Gudda to 7th main junction thereby connecting 
Kanakapura main road till Thalghattapura  Nice road via 
Pipe Line road.10.5
13Proposed  Additional  link road  to KIA,  Elevated  Corridor   
from  Outer  Ring Road – Hennur  main  road  junction  to 
Bagalur  Junction
 15Sl. 
No`CorridorLength  
Kms
14Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  along  Tannery  road  from  Madava  
Mudiliyar  road  to Nagawara  Junction .5.5
15Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  from  Yelahanka  New  town  to 
Kempegowda  International  Airport  Road4
16Proposed   Elevated  corridor  from  West  of Chord  Road  to 
Outer  Ring  road  via Pipe  Line  road  (Nandini  Layout) .4.5
DD1Proposed Double Decker Elevated corridor with Metro line  
from Hosahalli to Kadabagere  cross along Magadi road 
crossing ORR and NICE corridor.13
DD2Proposed Double -Decker Corridor in collaboration with Indian 
Railways, connecting the BEL Road intersection to the rear side 
of Yeshwanthpur Railway Station via Mohan Kumar Road.2.2
T1Proposed  North  – South  Tunnel  Corridor  from  Hebbal  to Silk 
Board18
T2Proposed  East- West  Tunnel  Corridor  from  K. R. Puram  (I.T.I  
Colony)  to Nayandahalli  NICE  intersection28
Total Length 170.7
Total Length of Tunnels 46
Total length of Elevated corridors/ Double Deckers/ 
Underpasses 124.7
Travel Demand Model
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  PlanBangalore road network map
Proposed Elevated Corridors Proposed Tunnels Existing Road Network
Figure 19 Image showing the Elevated corridors and tunnels mark on the existing road network of Bangalore 32

06 . 
Strategic Traffic 
Augmentation 
for High -Impact 
Roads
Goraguntaepalya 100ft Junction
K.R.PuramCORRIDOR
 I
Tumakuru 
road – Old 
Madras 
road 
Proposed  Elevated  
Corridor  form  
Tumakuru  Road  to 
Old Madras  Road  
from  
Goraguntae palya  – 
Yeshwanthpura -
IISC -Mekri  circle -
Jayamahal -St John  
Church  road -Ulsoor  
lake-Old Madras  
Road  -KR Puram
Corridor 1: Goraguntepalya  – Yeshwanthapura - IISC - Mekhri  circle - Jaymahal  road - St.John  Church road - Ulsoor 
lake -Old madaras  road -K Rpuram
This  corridor  serves  as a major  radial  road  from  Tumkur  Road  and is one of the oldest  national  highways,  connecting  the city to Chennai . 
The total  development  of the corridor  spans  23 kilometers,  starting  from  Goraguntepalya  Junction  and extending  to K.R. Puram . It passes  
through  Yeshwanthpur,  Mekhri  Circle,  and Jayamahal  Road,  reaches  Ulsoor  Lake  via St. John's  Church  Road,  and then  connects  to Old 
Madras  Road  at Baiyappanahalli , finally  ending  at K.R. Puram  as shown  in the Figure  20 below . However  the consultant  has made  efforts  to 
include  certain  portion  of the corridors  beyond  its defined  corridor  limits  to justify  certain  improvements  that may  enhance  the current  
project  objectives  .
Figure 20 showing the Corridor Alignment Plan from Goraguntaepalya to K.R.PuramComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
35
Yeshwanthpura  ( 
Mathikere  cross)
IISCMekri  Circle
Cantonment 
Halasur LakeCorridor 1 Section B: Yeshwanthapura  ( Mathikere  Cross) to Halasuru  lake Old Madras road Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
The corridor from Tumakuru road to Old Madras road is explained in section wise, section B is shown from Yeshwanthpuru  to Old Madras 
road near Halasur Lake as shown in the Figure 22 below.
Figure 21 showing the Corridor Alignment Plan from Yeshwanthpur to Old Madras road near Halasur Lake
36

K.R.Puram Baiyyappanahalli
BenniganahalliSuranjandas  road
100ft roadCorridor 1 Section C: Ulsoor lake Old Madras road to K.R.Puram   ( Extension road considered till Anil Kumble Circle 
via M.G Road)Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
The  corridor from Tumakuru road to Old Madras road is explained in section wise, section C is shown from Halasuru to K.R.Puram  as 
shown in the Figure 23 below.
Figure 22 showing the Corridor Alignment Plan from Ulsoor lake Old Madras road to K.R.Puram  
37

CORRIDOR  I: TUMKUR  ROAD  - (Mysore  Sandal  Soap  Factory  
to NICE  Interchange  / Bangalore  International  Exhibition  
Centre)
Figure 23. Tumkur Road CorridorThe first corridor  to be undertaken  for the corridor  improvement  study  is the Tumkur  Road  
Corridor,  which  is National  Highway  73 . The study  location  starts  from  Mysore  Sandal  
Soap  Factory  at Yeshwanthpur  and ends  at NICE  interchange  near  Bangalore  International  
Exhibition  Centre
The corridor  starts  from  Mysore  sandal  soap  factory  and the Yeshwanthpur  TTMC  and ends  
at NICE  interchange  or the BIEC  as shown  in Figure  24.  It is one of the busiest  radial  roads  
on the North -western  side of the city leading  towards  Mumbai .
Some  of the main  features  of the corridor  are:
•This  is a six-lane divided  road  with  service  roads  on either  sides . 
•Length  of the study  corridor  is 11 Km.
•The road  surface  is varying  from  bituminous  to concrete .
•There  are five number  of critical  signalized  junctions  along  the corridor .
•Metro  Rail runs  on the entire  corridor .
Landmarks,  Attraction   & Production  Centers
The corridor  attracts  many  work  trips  due to the Industries  located  along  the stretch,  
besides  Markets,  Malls,  Hotels  etc. Since  the road  network  around  Tumkur  Road  is well  
established,  a majority  of industrial  areas  are located  very  close  to this corridor . 
The corridor  attracts  many  trip generation  points  such  as those  mentioned  below  and 
shown  in Figure  25.•The biggest  wholesale  market  of agricultural  produce  in the city,  the 
Yeshwanthpur  APMC  Yard  (Figure  26) - This  market  generates  maximum  trips  in 
terms  of retailers  and wholesalers . The vehicular  density  in terms  of trucks,  LCVs,  
luggage  autos  is very  high . 
•The second  busiest  railway  station  after  the Majestic  railways  station  is the 
Yeshwanthpur  Railway  station  that is located  on Tumkur  Road .
•Mysore  sandal  soap  factory  is located  along  the corridor .
•Peenya  industrial  areas  are located  along  the corridor  near  Jalahalli,  which  
generate  maximum  trips .
Figure 25. APMC YardFigure 24. Attraction/ Generation Entities/ Areas
9
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan CORRIDOR CHARACTERISTICSComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
38
Figure 26. APMC Yard
•Mysore  Sandal  Soap •PVR
•Metro  Cash  & Carry •Golden  Grand  Apartments
•Yeshwanthpur  TTMC •RNS Motors
•Yeshwanthpur  Railway  Station •Peenya  Industrial  Area
•Yeshwanthpur  APMC •Pearle  Biscuit  Factory
•Taj Vivanta•Bangalore  International  Exhibition  
Centre
•Peoples  Tree Hospital •Dasarahalli  MarketThe other  major  landmarks  are mentioned  in Table  4  and shown  in Figure  27:
Metro  Stations  along  the Corridor
The Green  Line  Metro  runs  along  the corridor . There  are eight  Metro  stations  
located  along  the corridor,  which  are operational,  starting  from  Mysore  Sandal  
Soap  factory  to Nice  interchange
Metro stations along the corridor are as follows (Figure 28):
•Peenya Industry Metro Station.
•Jalahalli Metro Station.
•Dasarahalli Metro Station.
•Nagasandra Metro Station•Sandal Soap Factory Metro Station.
•Yeshwanthpur Metro Station.
•Goraguntepalya Metro Station.
•Peenya Metro Station.Major  Bus Stops  along  the Corridor
There  are seventeen  bus stops  located  on each  side of the corridor,  starting  
from  Mysore  Sandal  Soap  factory  to NICE  interchange . 
Bus bays  are not designed  along  the corridor,  which  is one of the major  
reasons  for traffic  congestions  along  the corridor . All the Bus Stop  locations  
are as shown  above  in Figure  29.
Corridor  Characteristics
The entire  corridor  is a 6 lane divided  two way  with  service  road  on either  
side,  except  on a small  stretch  where  the road  widths  are narrow  on the 
RHS  side near  the Yeshwanthpur  railway  station . Figure 27. Major LandmarksTable 5. Other important Landmarks
Figure 28. Metro stations along the corridor
Figure 29. Major Bus stands/ Bus stopsComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
10
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
39
Existing  Footpaths/Pedestrian  Facilities
It is observed  that the existing  footpath  condition  all along  the corridor  is very  poor  and 
at some  locations  there  are no footpaths  available . The pedestrian  facilities  are in 
complete  neglect . There  is only  one pedestrian  crossing  skywalk  near  the Yeshwanthpur  
railway  station  connecting  to other  end of the road . 
It is also observed  that after  the 100 feet road  intersection,  none  of the metro  stations  has 
got pedestrian  accessibility  from  the Left hand  side to the metro  station   (Figure  30 & 
Figure  31)
@  Yeshwanthpur Railway station opposite to 
Govardhan Theatre
@  Yeswanthapur Railway station
@ Nagasandra Metro  station
@  Jalahalli Metro station 
Near Nagasandra Metro, station LHS 
side
@  Jalahalli Junction 
At Grade Crossing along the Corridor 
Near Dasarahalli Metro Station
Near PVR
Near Nagasandra Metro 
station
Figure 30  Absence of Pedestrian accessibility to Metro Stations from LHS Figure 31. Absence of Pedestrian accessibility to Metro Stations from LHS Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
11Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
40
Figure 32. Absence of Pedestrian accessibility to Metro Stations from 
LHS 
Major  Junctions
Along  the 11 Km of stretch,  there  are 5 major  critical  intersections  where  maximum  
merging  and diverging  of the traffic  takes  place . List of Major  intersections  are as 
mentioned  below  (and  shown  in Figure  33)
•Goraguntepalya  intersection  – 3 arm Signalized  intersection .
•100 feet ORR  intersection  – 3 arm Signalized  intersection .
•SRS junction  – 3 arm Signalized  intersection .
•Jalahalli  cross  junction  –  4 arm Signalized  intersection . 
•NICE  interchange  – Bangalore  international  exhibition  centre  - Mid block  un-
signallized  intersectionSignage/  Markings/  Signals
Bengaluru  has the finest  signage  program  called  the “B-Trac  Project”  by Bangalore  
Traffic  police .  However,  it is observed  that this project   is not executed  correctly . The 
corridor  lacks  the right  signboards  at the right  positions,  the sign boards  do not have  
good  foundations  and most  of the sign boards  are either  damaged  or not relevant  to 
the site.  It is also observed  that the size of the sign boards  are not as per IRC standards . 
Road  safety  aspects  are also ignored  along  the corridor  to a larger  extent  which  is of 
major  concern . Some  of the safety  issues  are:
•Pedestrian  crossings  are completely  neglected . 
•Adequate  pedestrian  skywalks  not constructed . 
•Bus bays  are not built  for safe commuter  access . 
•Unscientific  medians  have  resulted  in accidents . 
•Median  end treatments  have  not been  done . 
•Crash  beam  barriers  are not  installed  at level  differences .
•Non -engineered  materials  are used  to close  the vents  on the bridges .
•Road  markings  not done .
•Road  safety  furniture  are missing  all along  the corridor . 
•Road  surface  at certain  points  is very  bad resulting  in two wheeler  skidding,  leading  
to sever  accidents .
•Sharp  Curves  are not treated  properly . 
•Old culverts  are not removed  from  the service  roads  which  are very  dangerous .
•Absence  of access  control  below  the metro  pillars  leading  to accidents .Figure 33. Critical Junctions along the Corridor
•On-street  markets  leading  to encroachments  in turn  creating  a safety  hazard .
•School  zones  along  the corridor  not treated .
•Speed  calming  methods  are not adequately  implemented . Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
12
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
41
Vendor  Zone
It is observed  that for stretch  of about  500 meters  from  the Dasarahalli  metro  station  on the RHS  there  is presence  of on-street  vegetable  market  
below  the metro  pillars  (Figure  34). During  peak  hours,  the road  users  park  their  vehicles  (cars  /two  wheelers)  on the main  carriageway  of the 
service  road  to shop  from  these  vendors  which  causes  traffic  jams  and congestions . The entire  vendor  zone  shall  need  to be redeveloped  in an 
engineered  manner .
Land  Use Along  the Corridor
It is observed  that majority  of the land  use pattern  along  the corridor  is the industrial  type  and the rest amounts  for public  and semi  public  places  with  commercial  
activities . It is also observed  that most  of the existing  residential  land  use are been  used  for commercial  purposes  (Same  is shown  in Figure  35). 
Figure 34. Vendor Zone
Figure 35. Landuse along the CorridorComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
13
Nice interchange
Mysore Sandal 
Soap Factory Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
42

PART B 
SURVEY ANALYSIS
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
14Traffic Survey Details
In order  to assess  the existing  traffic  and transport  characteristic  of the corridor  and to decide  on the type  of traffic  management  measures  needed,  
the surveys  mentioned  in chapter  4 were  carried  out. The survey  particulars  are as presented  below  in Table  6.
SL.NO TYPE OF SURVEY QUANTITY
1 Turning  Volume  Count 5 Intersections
2 Mid -block  Count 2 Locations
3 Pedestrian  Count  Survey 5 Intersections
4 Speed  And  Delay  (Bus  & Car) 11 Km
5 Road  Network  Inventory 11 Km
6 Traffic  Signal  Phasing 5 intersections
Traffic  Volume  Counts
Traffic  volume  count  survey  was conducted  at 2 Mid-block  locations  and for the remaining  stretches,  traffic  volumes  were  extracted  from  the 
turning  volume  counts  conducted  at junctions  along  the corridor  (Figure  36). The vehicles  counted  were  converted  to Passenger  Car Units  (PCUs)  
by adopting  equivalent  PCUs . The PCUs  corresponding  to Urban  Roads  as per Indo  Highway  Capacity  Manual  2012 -2017  (Chapter  5) were  used  
and the direction -wise  Peak  Hour  Traffic  Volumes  are as presented  in Table  7.Table 6. Traffic Survey Details
Table 7. Traffic Volume Counts
Vehicles PCUs Vehicles PCUs Vehicles PCUs Vehicles PCUs
1Yeshwanthpur 
TTMC11.00-12.00 3936 3210 3061 3089 19.30-20.30 4065 3636 3871 3224
2Yeshwanthpur 
Skywalk9.30-10.30 3177 3268 3895 4414 18.00-19.00 3281 3349 3582 4117
3Tumkur Road 
(Between 
Gorguntepalya-
SRS)9.15-10.15 3482 4429 7286 10204 17.45-18.45 4257 5255 6460 8533
4Tumkur Road 
(Between SRS-
Jalahalli 
Junction)9.45-10.45 4253 3541 2698 2495 17.30-18.30 4471 3703 2513 2399
5Tumkur Road 
(Between 
Jalahalli 
junction-
Hesarghatta 
Junction)10.45-11.45 2296 2835 1838 2009 19.30-20.30 3169 3632 2433 2615
6Tumkur Road 
(Between 
Hesarghatta 
Junction-
Nagasandra)10.45-11.45 2296 2835 1838 2009 19.30-20.30 3169 3632 2433 2615Evening Peak Hour Volume
Towards Yeshwanthpur Towards Nagasandra Towards Yeshwanthpur Towards Nagasandra Sl. No Road NameMorning  
Peak HourMorning Peak Hour Volume
Evening Peak 
HourComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
44
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
15Among  the 6 Mid-Block  locations  traffic  volume  between  Gorguntepalya  and SRS Junction  is found  to be highest  with  10857  PCUs  during  
morning  peak  hour  and 11290   PCUs  during  evening  peak  hour  followed  by Yeshwanthpur  Skywalk  with  traffic  volume  of 9544  PCUs  during  
morning  peak  and 9489  PCUs  during  evening  peak  hour .
Volume  to Capacity  Ratio  (V/C)  and Level  of Service
Volume  to Capacity  Ratio  (V/C  Ratio)  is defined  as the ratio  of peak  hour  traffic  flow  rate to capacity  and Level  of Service  (LOS)  is defined  as 
the a qualitative  measure,  describing  operational  conditions  within  a traffic  stream  and their  perception  by the drivers/passengers . 
Universally,  LOS  is lettering  scheme  ranging  from  A to F. LOS  ‘A’ represents  highest  quality  of service  whereas  LOS  ‘F’ represents  heavily  
congested  flow  where  traffic  demand  exceeds  capacity . The service  measures  used  for defining  LOS  are density  and volume -to-capacity  ratio . 
For computation  of V/C  Ratio  the capacity  values  have  been  adopted  based  on the road  geometrics  by applying  adjustment  factors  (as per 
Indo  Highway  Capacity  Manual  2012 -2017 ) conforming  to the site conditions . Figure 36. Tumkur Road Corridor Traffic Count Survey Locations
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
45
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
16The level  of friction  is categorized  as low,  medium  and severe  based  on the extent  of 
resistance  or speed  reduction  to the flow  as compared  to base  sections . The capacity  of 
the urban  road  section  is computed  using  the equation :Adjustment  Factors
Several  factors  would  have  impact  on traffic  movement  and on capacity  as compared  to 
the base  section . The factors  considered  for assessment  of influence  on capacity  include  
on-street  parking  manoeuvres ; entry  and exit of vehicles  from  access  road  and bus pull in 
and pull out manoeuvers  in bus bays  as well  as access  points . 
C= Co * FOP*    
FBS*FACWhere,
C= Actual  Capacity  (PCU/ hr)
Co    = Base  Capacity  for Ideal  Condition  (PCU/ hr)
FOP  = Adjustment  Factor  for On-street  Parking
FBS = Adjustment  Factor  for Bus Stops
FAC = Adjustment  Factor  for Access  PointIt was observed  that due to kerb  side bus stops  the effective  road  available  for movement  of 
other  vehicles  in the traffic  stream  reduces  resulting  in the capacity  reduction  at the 
following  locations :
1. Near  Yeshwanthpur  Skywalk
2. Between  Gorguntepalya -SRS
3. Between  SRS-Jalahalli  Junction
4. Between  Jalahalli  Junction -Hesarghatta  Junction
As the level  of friction  due to kerb  side bus stops  is high  (frequency  of buses> 30) the 
adjustment  factor  of 0.6 is considered  to compute  the actual  capacity .
 The ratio  of peak  hour  traffic  flow  rate to capacity  (V/C  Ratio)  and the Level  of Service  
(LOS)  of the road  sections  along  Tumkur  Road  Corridor  are presented  in Table  8
It can be observed  that amount  of traffic  approaching  near  Yeshwanthpur  Skywalk  and 
between  Gorguntepalya  and SRS Junction  exceeds  beyond  its capacity  resulting  in 
considerable  delay  and queuing . 
The volume  to capacity  ratio  at both  the locations  exceeds  1.0 and the Level  of Service  is 
found  to be ‘F’ which  indicates  heavily  congested  flow  where  traffic  demand  exceeds  
capacity
Table 8. Traffic Volume to Capacity ratio and Level of Service 
Towards 
Yeshwanthpur
Towards 
Nagasandra
Towards 
Yeshwanthpur
Towards 
Nagasandra
Towards 
Yeshwanthpur
Towards 
Nagasandra
Towards 
Yeshwanthpur
Towards 
Nagasandra
Towards 
Yeshwanthpur
Towards 
Nagasandra
Towards 
Yeshwanthpur
Towards 
Nagasandra
Towards 
Yeshwanthpur
Towards 
Nagasandra
1Yeshwanthpur 
TTMC2+2 Lanes 2700 2700 3407 3285 1.26 1.22 LOS F LOS F 3808 3362 1.41 1.25 LOS F LOS F
2Yeshwanthpur 
Skywalk4+2 Lanes 3360 2800 3668 4461 1.09 1.59 LOS F LOS F 3725 4163 1.11 1.49 LOS F LOS F
3Tumkur Road 
(Between 
Gorguntepalya-
SRS)4+4 Lanes 4080 4080 5362 5496 1.31 1.35 LOS F LOS F 5219 6071 1.28 1.49 LOS F LOS F
4Tumkur Road 
(Between SRS-
Jalahalli Junction)4+4 Lanes 4080 4080 3728 2601 0.91 0.64 LOS E LOS C 3897 2502 0.96 0.61 LOS E LOS C
5Tumkur Road 
(Between Jalahalli 
junction-
Hesarghatta 
Junction)4+4 Lanes 4080 4080 4451 2214 1.09 0.54 LOS F LOS C 4843 2847 1.19 0.7 LOS F LOS C
6Tumkur Road 
(Between 
Hesarghatta 
Junction-
Nagasandra)4+4 Lanes 6800 6800 2938 2097 0.43 0.31 LOS B LOS B 3752 2713 0.55 0.4 LOS C LOS BV/C RatioLevel of 
Service*Capacity*Typology of RoadRoad Name Sl. No.Morning Peak Evening Peak
Morning 
Peak Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C RatioLevel of 
Service*Evening 
Peak Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
46
Comprehensive Traffic Management  
Plan 
17Figure 37. Volume to Capacity Ratios along Tumkur Road CorridorTable 9. Traffic Volume to Capacity ratio and Level of Service 
Evening Peak
Towards 
YeshwanthpurTowards 
NagasandraTowards 
YeshwanthpurTowards 
Nagasandra
Yeshwanthpur 
TTMC1.26 1.22 1.41 1.25
Yeshwanthpur 
Skywalk1.09 1.59 1.11 1.49
Tumkur Road 
(Between 
Gorguntepalya-
SRS)1.31 1.35 1.28 1.49
Tumkur Road 
(Between SRS-
Jalahalli 
Junction)0.91 0.64 0.96 0.61
Tumkur Road 
(Between 
Jalahalli 
junction-
Hesarghatta 
Junction)1.09 0.54 1.19 0.70
Tumkur Road 
(Between 
Hesarghatta 
Junction-
Nagasandra)0.43 0.31 0.55 0.40MORNING PEAK EVENING PEAK
LOCATIONComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
47
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
18Traffic  Volume  at Junctions
The traffic  volumes  at intersections  help  in assessing  the traffic  volumes  at mid-block  locations  of the arms  of the intersection  which  together  with  
journey  speed  and road  inventory  data  aid in evaluating  the Level  of Service  (LOS)  of Urban  Arterials  and further,  the traffic  volumes  at mid-
block  also established  the need  for safe pedestrian  crossing  facility  taking  into account  the pedestrian  crossing  volumes .   
Among  the 5 turning  volume  count  surveyed  locations  100ft Ring  Road  Junction  is noted  with  highest  peak  hour  volume  (9571  PCUs  during  morning  peak  and 
9645  PCUs  during  evening  peak)  followed  by Gorguntepalya  Junction  near  Taj Vivanta  with  8229  PCUs  during  morning  peak  and 8829  during  evening  peak  as 
presented  below  in Table  10Traffic  volume  counts  were  conducted  at 5 major  intersections  along  the study  corridor  to assess  the existing  traffic  level . The locations  were  duly  identified  based  
on reconnaissance  for conduct  of turning  traffic  volume  count  surveys . The vehicles  counted  were  converted  to Passenger  Car Units  (PCUs)  by adopting  equivalent  
PCUs . he PCUs  corresponding  to Signalized  Intersections  as per Indo  Highway  Capacity  Manual  2012 -2017  (Chapter  6) was used  and the Peak  Hour  Junction  
Volumes  are as presented  below .
Speed  and Delay
Speed  & delay  survey  provides  a link wise  estimate  of journey  time,  running  time  and delay . Speed  and Delay  Survey  was carried  out for 
Bus and Car separately  during  morning  and evening  peak  hours . In case of Car Speed  and Delay  Survey,  floating  car technique  has been  
utilized  for obtaining  data  wherein  the driver  is instructed  to follow  the designated  route  course,  while  maintaining  the average  speed  of 
other  traffic  and accompanied  by trained  members  of the team  who  record  the cumulative  time  at specified  timing  points  to ensure  
obtaining  the average  link travel  time  of the road  network . 
The overall  travel  speed  generally  referred  to as journey  speed  is the effective  speed  between  two points  and is computed  as the distance  
divided  by the total  time  taken  by the vehicle  to complete  the journey  including  delays  incurred  en-route . Table 10. Peak Hour Traffic Volumes
Vehicles PCUs Vehicles PCUs
1Gorgunte Palya 
Junction-Near 
Taj Vivanta10192 8229 10.00-11.00 11197 8829 18.15-19.15
2100 Ft Ring Road 
Junction13150 9571 9.15-10.15 13086 9645 17.30-18.30
3 SRS Junction 9213 6141 9.45-10.45 9243 6175 17.30-18.30
4Jalahalli 
Junction8434 6500 10.45-11.45 10201 7982 19.45-20.45
5Hesarghatta 
Main Road 
Junction7012 5507 10.30-11.30 8645 6776 19.30-20.30Sl. No. Junction NameMorning Peak Hour Volume Morning  Peak 
HourEvening Peak Hour Volume Evening Peak 
HourComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
48
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
19The speed  maintained  by the vehicle  over  the stretch  while  in motion  is the running  speed  obtained  through  dividing  the distance  by the 
duration  of time  while  the vehicle  is in motion  and thus  excludes  that part of time  wherein  the vehicle  suffers  delay . The journey  speed  and 
the variation  between  running  speed  and journey  speed  is the indicator  of level  of service  and a measure  of congestion . The survey  data  
analysis  also highlights  the causes  of delay  that occur  at various  locations  such  as stopped  delay  or operational  delay .  
The direction -wise  abstract  of analysis  along  Tumkur  Road  Corridor  by the name  of road,  length  surveyed,  overall  travel  time,  journey  
speed  and running  speed  are furnished  below  in Table  11 & graphically  represented  in Figure  38:
Table 11. Bus Speed and Delay - Towards Tumkur (Morning Peak)
Sl.No . From Node To NodeLength(in 
Kms)DelayJourne
y TimeRunnin
g TimeJourne
y 
SpeedRunning 
SpeedReasons  for Delay
1TTMC - 
YeshwanthpurMEI Junction 1.8 37.0 487 450 13 14Unauthorized bus 
stoppage on the Main 
Carriageway
2 MEI JunctionGoraguntepalya 
Junction0.7 10 148 138 17 18 Traffic  Flow Delay
3Goraguntepalya 
Junction100 Ft Junction 0.5 107 169 62 11 29Narrow Road  , presence 
of bus stop and hospital 
along with Criss Crossing 
Traffic towards Mysore
4 100 Ft  Junction SRS Junction 1.0 43.0 170 127 21 28Unauthorized bus 
stoppage by BMTC, 
KSRTC  & Private buses at 
the junction 
5 SRS Junctionpeenya  1st 
StageJunction1.0 25 142 117 25 31Narrow road width at 
the junction
6peenya  1st 
StageJunctionJalahalli  Cross 
Junction0.5 10 68 58 26 31 Traffic Flow  Delay
7Jalahalli  Cross 
JunctionDasarahalli  Junction 1 34 138 104 26 35Unauthorized bus 
stoppage by BMTC, 
KSRTC  & Private buses at 
the junction 
8 Dasarahalli  Junction 8th  Mile Junction 1 25 143 118 25 31Due to Service road 
traffic entering the main 
carriageway
9 8th  Mile Junction Madavara bus stop 3.5 125 532 407 24 31Bus Stoppage time and 
traffic flow delay
AVERAGE 21 28Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
49
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
20Table 12. Bus Speed and Delay - Towards Yeshwanthapur  (Morning Peak)
Sl.No . From Node To NodeLength(i
n Kms )DelayJourney 
TimeRunning 
TimeJourney 
SpeedRunning 
SpeedReasons  for Delay
1 Madavara  bus stop 8th  Mile Junction 3.5 73.0 803 730 16 17 Metro construction 
2 8th  Mile Junction Dasarahalli  Junction 1.0 3 256 253 14 14
3Dasarahalli  
Junctionjlahalli  Cross Junction 1.0 58 154 96 23 38 Manual Signal Delay
4Jalahalli  Cross 
JunctionPeenya  1st Stage 
Junction0.5 66 127 61 14 30Unauthorized stoppage of 
buses 
5Peenya  1st Stage 
JunctionSRS Junction 1.0 39 182 143 20 25 Traffic flow  delay
6 SRS Junction 100 Ft Junction 1.0 131 131 27 27
7 100 FT JunctionGoraguntepalya 
Junction0.5 44 127 83 14 22Criss crossing  of  vehicles 
and signal delay
8Goraguntepalya 
JunctionMEI Junction 0.7 159 159 16 16
9 MEI JunctionSandal Soap Factory 
Junction1.8 456 456 14 14
AVERAGE 18 23
Figure 38. Average Morning Bus 
Speeds
 along the Tumkur Corridor Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
50
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
21Sl.N
o. From Node To NodeLength(in 
Kms)DelayJourney 
TimeRunnin
g TimeJourney 
SpeedRunning 
SpeedReasons for Delay
1 TTMC - Yeshwanthpur MEI Junction 1.8 117.0 444 327 15 20Unauthorized bus  stoppage, 
crisscrossing of vehicles
2 MEI JunctionGoraguntepalya 
Junction0.7 37 172 135 15 19 Bus stoppage delay
3Goraguntepalya 
Junction100 Ft Junction 0.5 115 266 151 7 12Unauthorized bus  stoppage, 
crisscrossing of 
vehicles moving towards  
Mysore road
4 100 Ft  Junction SRS Junction 1.0 152.0 369 217 10 17Unauthorized bus stoppage by 
BMTC, KSRTC  & Private buses 
at the junction 
5 SRS JunctionPeenya  1st 
StageJunction1.0 76 241 165 15 22Delay  due to road repair 
construction trucks  
6Peenya  1st 
StageJunctionJalahalli  Cross 
Junction0.5 82 143 61 13 30 Manual  Signal Delay
7 Jalahalli  Cross Junction Dasarahalli  Junction 1 263 414 151 9 24Unauthorized bus  stoppage at 
the junction
8 Dasarahalli  Junction 8th  Mile Junction 1 106 253 147 14 24Traffic Flow delay and bus  
stoppage delay
9 8th  Mile Junction Madavara  bus stop 3.5 56 540 484 23 26 Traffic  Flow delay
AVERAGE 13 21Table 13. Bus Speed and Delay - Towards Tumkur (Evening Peak)
Sl.No
.From Node To NodeLength(in 
Kms)DelayJourney 
TimeRunning 
TimeJourney 
SpeedRunning 
SpeedReasons for Delay
1 Madavara  bus stop 8th  Mile Junction 3.5 132 632 500 20 25 Metro construction 
2 8th  Mile Junction Dasarahalli  Junction 1.0 80 206 126 17 29 Due to Vegetable Market
3 Dasarahalli  Junction Jalahalli  Cross Junction 1.0 143 220 77 16 47 Manual Signal Delay
4Jalahalli  Cross 
JunctionPeenya  1st Stage Junction 0.5 56.0 133 77 14 23Unauthorized stoppage of 
buses 
5Peenya  1st Stage 
JunctionSRS Junction 1.0 24 147 123 24 29 Traffic flow  delay
6 SRS Junction 100 FT Junction 1.0 14 167 153 22 24Traffic flow  delay
7 100 Ft Junction Goraguntepalya Junction 0.5 16 105 89 17 20Criss crossing  of  vehicles and 
signal delay
8Goraguntepalya 
JunctionMEI Junction 0.7 16 187 171 13 15 Traffic flow  delay
9 MEI Junction TTMC - Yeshwanthpur 1.8 33 403 370 16 18Traffic flow  delay
AVERAGE 18 25Table 14. Bus Speed and Delay - Towards Yeshwanthpur  (Evening Peak)Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
51
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
22It was observed  that the lower  journey  speeds  are mainly  due to traffic  congestion,  unauthorised  bus stoppage  at the junction  and the delays  
are mostly  occurring  at junctions . The Average  Bus Journey  Speed  is approximately  21 Kmph  during  morning  peak  hour  towards  Tumkur  
and 18 kmph  towards  Yeshwanthpur . Similarly,  during  evening  peak  hour  average  speed  of the bus towards  Tumkur  is 13 kmph  and 
towards  Yeshwanthpur  is 18 kmph  as shown  in (Figure  28).
Figure 39. Average Evening  Bus Speeds  along the Tumkur Corridor Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
52
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
23Table 15. Average Morning  Peak Speed & Delay Details - CarsCar Speed and Delay
It was observed  that the lower  journey  speeds  are mainly  due to traffic  congestion  and the delays  are mostly  occurring  at junctions . The 
Average  car Journey  Speed  is approximately  31 Kmph  during  morning  peak  hour  and 30kmph  during  evening  peak  hour . The Average  
Journey  speeds  are shown  in Tables  14-15 & graphically  represented  in Figure  40-41.
Direction: Yeshwanthpur to Nice Interchange (11 KMs) - Morning Peak - CARS
Sl.N
o.From Node To NodeDistance 
(km)Delay 
(Sec)Journey 
Time (sec)Running 
Time (sec)Journey 
Speed 
(kmph)Running 
Speed 
(kmph)Delay Cause
1Yeshwanthpur  
TTMCYeshwanthpur 
Skywalk0.8 53 196 143 15 20Unauthorized bus  
stoppage, crisscrossing of 
vehicles
2Yeshwanthpur  
SkywalkMEI Junction 1.2 50 258 208 17 21Criss -Crossing of vehicles 
at the service road 
openings and Pedestrian 
crossings at PVR
3 MEIJunctionGoragunate  palya  
Junctio0.6 20 120 100 18 22 Traffic Jam at the Junction
4Goragunate  
palya  Junctio100ft ORR 
Junction0.5 58 132 74 14 24Unauthorized bus  
stoppage, crisscrossing of 
vehicles moving towards 
Mysore road
5100ft ORR 
JunctionSRS Junction 1 33 116 83 31 43Narrow road width at the 
Junction
6 SRS JunctionPeenya 1st Stage 
Junction1 10 105 95 34 38Road construction trucks  
blocking the road
7Peenya 1st Stage 
JunctionJalahalli 
intersection0.5 15 48 33 38 55Buses stopping randomly 
near the junction
8Jalahalli 
intersectionPillar 471 0.8 33 107 74 27 39 Manual  Signal Controll
9 Pillar 471 8th Mile 0.6 28 76 48 28 45 Traffic flow delay
10 8th Mile Nice Interchange 4 57 337 280 43 51 Toll Queue
AVERAGE 26 36Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
53
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
24Direction: Nice Interchange to Yeshwanthpur -Morning Peak -CARS
Sl.no From Node To NodeDista
nce 
(km)Delay 
(Sec)Journey 
Time 
(sec)Runni
ng 
Time 
(sec)Journey 
Speed 
(kmph)Runnin
g Speed 
(kmph)Delay Cause
1 Nice Interchange8th Mile4 37 446 409 32 35 Metro Construction
2 8th Mile Pillar 471 0.6 40 97 57 22 38 On street Market
3 Pillar 471Jalahalli 
intersection0.8 45 91 46 32 63 On street Market
4Jalahalli 
intersectionPeenya 1st Stage 
Junction0.5 15 56 41 32 44 Traffic Flow Delay
5Peenya 1st Stage 
JunctionSRS Junction 1 37 97 60 37 60 Traffic Flow Delay
6 SRS Junction100ft ORR 
Junction1 40 110 70 33 51Merging and 
Diverging of Vehicles
7100ft ORR 
JunctionGoraguntepalya 
Junction0.5 87 143 56 13 32Merging and 
Diverging of Vehicles
8Goraguntepalya 
JunctionMEI Junction 0.6 17 115 98 19 22 Traffic Flow Delay
9 MEI JunctionYeshwanthpur 
Skywalk1.2 78 267 189 16 23Pedestrian crossing  
and Narrow road near 
the skywalk
10Yeshwanthpur 
SkywalkYeshwanthpur 
TTMC0.8 57 198 141 15 20 Traffic Flow Delay
AVERAGE 24 39Table 16 Average Morning Peak Speed & Delay Details - CarsComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
54
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
25Figure 40. Average Morning   Car Speeds  along the Tumkur Corridor 
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
55
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
26Table 17. Average Evening  Peak Speed & Delay Details - Cars
Sl.No . From Node To NodeDistance 
(km)Delay 
(Sec)Journey 
Time (sec)Running 
Time (sec)Journey 
speed 
(kmph)Running 
speed 
(kmph)Journey 
Speed 
(kmph)
1Yeshwanthpur  
TTMCYeshwanthpur 
Skywalk0.8 80 197 117 15 25Traffic 
congestion
2Yeshwanthpur  
SkywalkMEI Junction 1.2 63 287 224 15 19 -
3 MEIJunction Taj Vivanta 0.6 21 128 107 17 20 Traffic
4 Taj Vivanta100ft ORR 
Junction0.5 51 120 69 15 26 Traffic
5100ft ORR 
JunctionSRS Junction 1 41 134 93 27 39 -
6 SRS JunctionPeenya 
junction Pillar 
4421 16 112 96 32 38 -
7Peenya 
junction Pillar 
442Jalahalli 
intersection0.5 10 65 55 28 33 -
8Jalahalli 
intersectionPillar 471 0.8 33 143 110 20 26 -
9 Pillar 471 8th Mile 0.6 41 88 47 25 46 -
10 8th MileNice 
Interchange4 22 312 290 46 50 Toll Queue
AVERAGE 24 32Direction: Yeshwanthpur to Nice Interchange (11 KMs) - Evening Peak - CARSComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
56
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
27Table 18. Average Evening  Peak Speed & Delay Details - Cars
Direction: Nice Interchange to Yeshwanthpur - Evening Peak - CARS
Sl.no From Node To NodeDistance 
(km)Delay (Sec)Journey 
Time (sec)Running 
Time (sec)Journey 
speed 
(kmph)Running 
speed 
(kmph)Delay Cause
1Nice 
Interchange 8th Mile4 53 458 405 31 36Metro 
Construction
2 8th Mile Pillar 471 0.6 67 137 70 16 31On street 
Market
3 Pillar 471Jalahalli 
intersection0.8 53 111 58 26 50On street 
Market
4Jalahalli 
intersectionPeenya 
junction Pillar 
4420.5 23 68 45 26 40Traffic Flow 
Delay
5Peenya 
junction 
Pillar 442SRS Junction 1 27 103 76 35 47Traffic Flow 
Delay
6SRS 
Junction100ft ORR 
Junction1 67 176 109 20 33Merging and 
Diverging of 
Vehicles
7100ft ORR 
JunctionGoragunate  
palya  
Junction0.5 56 113 57 16 32Merging and 
Diverging of 
Vehicles
8Goragunate  
palya  
JunctionMEI Junction 0.6 10 107 97 20 22Traffic Flow 
Delay
9 MEIJunctionYeshwanthpu
r Skywalk1.2 80 232 152 19 28Pedestrian 
crossing  and 
Narrow road 
near the 
skywalk
9Yeshwanthp
ur SkywalkYeshwanthpu
r TTMC0.8 23 174 151 17 19Traffic Flow 
Delay
AVERAGE 22 34Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
57
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
28
Figure 41. Average Evening Car Speeds  along the Tumkur Corridor Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
58

Comprehensive Traffic Management  
Plan 
37Road  Inventory  Details  
Link No Name of Road Name of Starting Point Name of Ending PointCarriageway WidthService Lane 
Width
LHS Width MedianRHS 
WidthLHS RHS
1 Tumkur Road Sandal SoapFactory  Junction Govardhan Bus stop FOB 9.4 8.4 8.8 8.3 8.0
2 Tumkur Road Govardhan  Bus stop FOBKhader  Road( Govardhan  
Theatre) 16.0 2.5 9.3 0.0 0.0
3 Tumkur RoadKhader Road(Govardhan 
Theatre)Yeshwanthpur Railway 
Station 10.2 2.8 10.2 8.8 0.0
4 Tumkur RoadYeshwanthpur Railway 
Station MEI Signal 7.8 2.8 12.0 12.0 9.7
5 Tumkur Road MEI Signal Gorugunte  palya  Junction 10.8 3.8 15.7 9.2 0.0
6 Tumkur Road Gorugunte  palya  Junction CMTI Junction 23.5 2.8 20.8 0.0 0.0
7 Tumkur Road CMTI Junction SRS Junction 15.6 0.6 16.7 7.0 8.4
8 Tumkur Road SRS Junction Peenya 1st Stage Junction 8.5 4.0 8.5 5.8 5.8
9 Tumkur Road Peenya 1st Stage Junction Jalahalli Cross Junction 8.2 4.0 8.5 5.8 5.8
@Yeshwanthapur  TMMCTable 19. Road Inventory Details 
Figure 42. Road Inventory Yeshwanthpur TTMCComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
59

Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
38
@H Cross - 8Th mile junction 
@Jalahalli Junction 
@Nice Interchange
@Taj Vivanta
Figure 43. Road Inventory along the corridorComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
60

Asperthestandards and general conditions required toconstruct theflyovers,
itissuggested that large radii right -turn curves aremore dangerous than left
curves, inparticular, during lane-changing manoeuvres .However, sharper
curves aremore dangerous inboth leftand right curves .
“The angularity ofthecurve may beashigh as70degrees while themaximum
curvature recommended isonly 45degrees .The steep curve creates apowerful
centrifugal force onspeeding vehicles, throwing them offthe flyover,”
Already two ministerial government vehicles have been toppled atthisstretch
oftheflyover and two trucks were thrown offtheflyover killing two people
intherecent months allthisisdue topoor engineering design .
The other reason isdue tohigher speeds and negligence driving .Since the
flyover has asharp curve, driving atspeeds more than 50kmph might be
fatal .
The height oftheexisting parapet wall ontheflyover isvery less indicating
poor geometric designs .Higher speeds areobserved ontheflyover, and since
theheight ofthecentral median isjust8inches, thevehicles tend tocross over
totheopposite lanes while manoeuvring thesharp curve .
Tapering edges atthebottom oftheparapet wall ontheflyover, actasthe
platform totake-off,resulting thevehicles tothrow them offtheflyover . The 
issues  are highlighted  in Figure  44-45 
`✓Traffic calming measures need tobeimplemented tocontrol theover
speeding ofvehicles ontheflyover which isone ofthemajor reasons for
accidents .Hence, traffic calming measures asper IRC 99-2018 are
recommended .The IRC recommends applying 15 mm thick
thermoplastic paints inaseries ofsixstrips (one setwill have sixstrips) .
Based onthespeeds onthecorridors, thethermoplastic rumble sets are
decided .e.g.ifthespeed is50kmph then one setofrumble strip is
required and similarly, two sets for51-65kmph, three sets forupto80
kmph and above 80kmph four sets ofthermoplastic paints need tobe
applied . (Figure  46)
Figure 46. Traffic calming measuresFigure 45. Issues at Yeshwanthpur Flyover
Figure 44. Turning Radius at Yeshwanthpur FlyoverTurning Radius at Yeshwanthpur  Flyover
Recommendations:ISSUE IDENTIFICATION AND CONCEPTUAL AT GRADE SOLUTIONSComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
61
✓Height oftheparapet walls ontheflyover needs tobeincreased toaminimum of6feet, which will help instopping thevehicles that are
thrown offtheflyover .This will help inreducing fatal accidents .Ifthevehicles fallbelow, then the chances offatalities will increase asthe
at-grade junction isoneofthebusiest junctions inthecity.Similarly, theheight ofthecentral median needs toberaised tosafeguard the
vehicles that tend tocross over due toover speeding . (Figure  47)
Benefits: 
➢Over -speeding of the vehicles will be controlled on the flyover,  which will help in reducing accidents.
➢Due to the increased height of parapet walls, toppling of the vehicles from  the flyover can be prevented.
➢Increasing the height of the median will help in restricting vehicle cross overs  due to over speeding.
Traffic congestion attheYeshwanthpur flyover isimpediment imposed byvehicles oneach other, i.e.thevehicles coming from theflyover and thevehicles coming at
grade .The vehicular volume here isequal toormore than thecapacity oftheroad stretch .
The traffic volume atthis location canbedefined asthedifference between the roadway system design capacity and theactual operating capacity, and assimply put,
asituation where demand forroad space exceeds supply .The situation indicates theinability ofthecurrent system toaccommodate theexisting traffic situation atthe
down ramp oftheflyover .``Figure 47. Recommendations at Yeshwanthpur Flyover
Traffic Congestion at Down Ramp of Yeshwanthpur Flyover opposite to TTMC
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
62
``Aspertheobserved traffic flow pattern, two lanes oftraffic iscoming from the Yeshwanthpur flyover and theother two lanes from atgrade -one
from TTMC and the other one from Malleswaram, meeting attherailway bridge .Itisobserved that the road width atthis stretch reduces from 21
meters to7meters inaspan ofjust20meters .
Due tothelimited transition length, merging and diverging becomes difficult and with narrow bridge ahead, things have worsened, leading to
serious traffic congestions during thepeak hours .
Itisobserved that atcertain periods during thepeak hours, thetraffic speed isless than 5km/hr, which isalmost, stand still and isthemajor reason
forconcern .Thedetails ofthesituation areexplained inFigure 48.
Figure 48Lane Con figuration at the 
Railway Bridge
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
63

✓Itisobserved that there isanopen land
available onthe LHS, asindicated in
Figure 49-50,with theexpansion line;
theun-utilized open space available on
the LHS beused for expanding the
carriageway width from the existing
two lanes tofour lanes .
✓The expansion of the carriageway
widths requires the expansion ofthe
railway bridge, i.e.theconstruction of
additional deck/slab forthebridge .Figure 49Road inventory on the Railway Bridge
`✓The next recommendation istodothe
geometric design corrections onthe
minor junction located very next to
the railway bridge asthe impact of
upgrading the carriageway from a
two-lane road tofour -lane will be
seen on theexisting minor junction .
Hence, theentire junction needs tobe
redesigned .The conceptual junction
improvement plan isasshown in
Figure 51-52.`
Figure 50. Conceptual Drawing of Junction near Yeshwanthpur TTMCComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
64
``Figure 51. Conceptual Drawing of junction near Yeshwanthpur TTMC ✓The junction istobere-designed with two central channels with 5.5
meters wide slip roads that will allow traffic taking afree leftturn from
Mekri Circle /Yeshwanthpur toRailway Parallel Road that leads to
Malleswaram .The other channel will allow thetraffic tomove towards
Orion Mall and will allow free leftturning from Orion mall toTumkur
side.
➢The Recommendations mentioned above once implemented will
result inincreasing thespeeds ofbuses and other vehicles and will
decrease thecongestion and delays .
➢Itwill allow safe transition length formerging and diverging of
vehicles, which travel towards Tumkur and Rajajinagar .
➢The travel time onthis stretch will increase and simultaneously this
will
directly reflect onthejunctions located before and after this stretch .
➢Itwill reduce theQueue lengths ofthebuses below theflyover ramp
coming from TTMC and will help inincreasing thetrip timings .
➢The stresses ofroad users along this road stretch, especially during
the
peak hour traffic congestions will getreduced and ithelps insafe
driving .Benefits:
Road Safety Issue
a)Level Difference on the Sharp curve opposite to Mysore sandal 
soap  factory.
The level  difference  in the road  network  is a serious  issue,  which  needs  to 
be addressed   immediately  on priority . Here  at this location,  the steep  
slope  is located  on the sharp   curve,  which  makes  it even  more  
dangerous,  as shown  in the location  map  (Figure  52).
The level difference ismore than 7.8meters ontheLeft-Hand side ofthe
road, opposite toMysore sandal soap factory and moving towards
Tumkur .Apart from this, thespot islocated onavery sharp curve with
aturning radius ofalmost 90degrees, which makes vehicle
manoeuvring achallenging job.Ifavehicle isdriving athigh speeds and
fails tonegotiate thesharp curve, might result inafatal accident, wherein
the vehicle may fallover from level one toatgrade .Asshown inthe
Figure  53 & 54.Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
65
`
`
Figure 52. Road Safety Issue opposite Mysore Sandal Soap FactoryFigure 53. Road Safety Issue opposite Mysore Sandal Soap Factory
Figure 54. Measurement of Steep Slope at  Mysore Sandal Soap FactoryComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
66
and thefootpath arealmost atthesame level and theslope starts immediately
after thefootpath making itaserious accidental hazardous location .
Recommendation
✓First and the foremost thing which is
recommendedon priorityisthe
installation/fixing ofrigid crash beam barriers
attheedge oftheshoulders toavoid vehicle
toppling .
✓Once the Crash beam barrier  (Figure 55) is 
installed,  the face of the beam should be fixed 
with  chevron reflective stickers to guide the  
road users.
✓Traffic  calming  measures  need  to be implemented tocontrol over speeding onthesharp
curve which isone ofthe major reasons foraccidents, hence traffic calming measures a
perIRC 99-2018 isrecommended
The existing RoB near theYeshwanthpur TTMC isatdifferent levels .The oldbridge is
located onthe RHS and the newly constructed bridge isatLHS .Due tothis level
difference, avent iscreated between thetwo bridges .Instead ofclosing this vent inan
engineering way, theconcerned authority hasdone atemporary arrangement byusing
dangerous materials .Now, this closure has become another situation, which iseven
more dangerous .
The material used toclose thevent isthe‘I’section girder which isdangerously projected
outand during thenight and rainy season itisnotvisible totheroad users which will
result infatal accidents .The barricading indone inanunscientific manner and isdone
only toclose half thevent, theother half isstill open which needs tobetreated . (Figure  
56)
Figure 55. Rigid Crash beam Barriers
``
Figure 56. Vent Closure Issues near Yeshwanthpur TTMC b) Unscientific Vent Closure at the existing  ROB.
Recommendation
✓The existing temporary barricade needs to be removed  immediately.
✓The vent should be closed by a brick wall or concrete retaining  wall.
Benefits:
➢The Recommendations  mentioned  above  once  implemented  will result  in 
controlling over speeds.
➢Will help in restricting vehicle toppling from one level to  another.
➢Will reduce accidents and increase  safety.
➢Closing the vent will help in two-wheeler  safety.
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
67
``Tumakuru corridor isgrowing fast leading toanincreased demand forpublic transport services and facilities .This has subsequently ledto
challenges toprovide suiTable bus stops and terminals .The Municipalities arekeen toprovide good public transport but have failed inproviding
theneeded space .There isalso alack ofknowledge inthis problem area .
The BMTC has grown significantly over thelast two decades years .While BMTC buses provide auseful service, their on-street operations are
causing serious disruption tothe local traffic network and risks topublic safety .Incertain stretches along theTumkuru corridor, theproliferation of
these buses hasledtoanincrease intraffic and sidewalk congestion ;ahigher concentration ofon-street busparking, double parking or blocking  of 
travel  lanes ; and the creation  of traffic  and safety  concerns  for drivers,   travellers,  pedestrians  and residents .Unauthorized Bus Stoppage
The location under discussion isatthedown ramp oftheROB going towards Tumkur and isright infront ofESSAR petrol pump and below the
pedestrian, askywalk that connects theYeshwanthpur railway station .Unauthorized busparking toalight and board thecommuters onthecentre
ofthemain carriageway hascreated traffic chaos during thepeak hours, particularly atthetime when theinter -citytrains arrive in.
Figure 57 Existing Site Scenario near Yeshwanthapura Railway Station .Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
68
`Itisobserved that, whenever thetrain arrives during theday, thecommuters usethe pedestrian skywalk and cross over totheother side ofthe
road .Onreaching theother side rather than moving towards theexisting bus stop, which islocated just 30meters from theskywalk, the
commuters prefer tostand attheentrance ofthestaircase orstand onthecentral median totake thecity service buses .Toadd onthis, theBMTC
buses rather than stopping onthedesignated bus stop, park their buses onthemain carriageway atmultiple places inaspan of100 meters
creating huge traffic jams, which isshown intheFigure s 57 & 58.
The other  major  issue  at this point   is the merging  and diverging  of  the vehicles . The traffic  coming   from  the down  ramp  of the ROB   from  
Yeshwanthpur  side and the traffic  coming  at grade  from  Rajajinagar   meets  at a point  where  criss -cross  of vehicles   takes  place  and due to the lack  
of road  sense  among  the drivers,   accidents and traffic congestions  are common  at this  stretch  of Tumkur  Road .
Animproper geometric design ofthe roadway  is the issue  atthis location  i.e. the unscientific median opening near tothedown ramp isresulting intraffic  
congestions .
Figure 58. Issues of Unauthorised Bus Stoppage
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
69
✓The existing median opening atthedown ramp needs tobeclosed toavoid unscientific
crisscrossing which isleading totraffic congestions and accidents . (Figure  57)
✓The median  needs  to be extended  until  the existing  bus stop and thereafter  the  entire  
median  needs  to be removed  to avoid  unauthorized  bus stoppage  on  the central  lane and 
this will force  the commuters  to walk  to the authorized  bus  stop  to take the bus.
✓Currently,  there  is no  dedicated  bus stop for BMTC   buses  at this location . A new   bus 
stop  is proposed  near  the  KIA car showroom  which  is just 20 meters  away  from  the 
existing  skywalk . Sufficient   carriageway  width  is available   to accommodate  one lane for  
the buses . The existing  width   available  at this proposed   location  on the LHS  is 20 meters,  
which  is sufficient  to have  controlled  bus bay. (Figure  59)
`Recommendation
Figure 59. Conceptual Drawing of Junction near Yeshwanthpur Railway Station SkywalkComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
✓Above  all, strict  enforcement  by BMTC  is required ; BMTC  has to train  its drivers   and conductors  to make  sure  that buses  stop  only  at the 
authorized  bus stops   and not to pick  the commuters  near  the skywalk  of from  the middle  of the road .
70
`➢The Recommendations mentioned above once implemented will result inincreasing thespeeds ofbuses and other vehicles and will decrease the congestion
and delays .
➢Will eliminate thedelays caused due tocrisscrossing atthedown ramp .
➢The travel time onthisstretch will increase due totheshifting ofthebus stop .
➢Bycreating busbays theBMTC buses will function systematically and byremoving thecentral median, BMTC buses will notstop inthemiddle oftheroad to
pick thecommuters thus eliminating traffic jams .
➢Extension ofthecentral median and byimplementing theTraffic Management Plan, thetraffic circulation will besmooth around thearea.
At-grade Pedestrian crossing  IssueBenefits:
However, during theday thetraffic density isvery high making itdifficult forthe pedestrian tocross theroad .
Itisalso observed that during thepeak hours, more than two hundred pedestrians cross theroad notonly due tothecinema theatres butalso due
tothepresence ofbus stops oneither side oftheroad atthis location .Any pedestrian -vehicle conflict would befatal because ofthespeeds ofthe
vehicles travelling onthis stretch ofthe roadway  (during  off-peak  periods) .
Figure 60. Pedestrian Skywalk 
ProposalComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
Pedestrians,  in general,  face a common  obstacle  at several  locations  along  the  Highway . Crossing  the road  is one of the major  problems . Due to the 
sheer  increase  in  the number  of vehicles  and the speeds  at which  they  operate,  pedestrians  face a  severe  challenge  while  crossing  the highway  in 
the absence  of any safe pedestrian   crossing  facility . A similar  situation  can be seen  right  in front  of PVR  cinemas . Vehicular   speeds  at this location  
are very  high  during  off-peak  hours  and late-night  hours .
71

➢Installation ofPelican signal will help insafe pedestrian crossing atgrade
and will make thevehicles tostop while thepedestrians arecrossing the
road .
➢The long -term proposal forconstructing apedestrian skywalk will help in
safe pedestrian movement and will avoid any pedestrian -vehicle conflicts .
`•One ofthemajor issues atthis location isenforcement .The busstop islocated
at70meters from the junction but buses stop atthe turning, making it
difficult forother vehicles tomove, thus resulting inlong queues .
✓The entire junction needs to be redesigned as per engineering standards
/guidelines.
Figure 61. Pedestrian Skywalk Proposal Location
Figure 62. Issues at Taj Vivanta Hotel JunctionBenefits :
Recommendations :Left Turning Issue at Taj Vivanta  HotelRecommendation
✓As a short -term improvement, a Pelican signal for pedestrian should be  
installed for safe pedestrian crossing from either side.
✓A Pedestrian skywalk is proposed at this location as a long term improvement  
strategy  (Figure 61 -62)Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
This  is one of the critical  intersections  along  the corridor,  which  carries  the Outer  
Ring   Road  traffic,  and the National  Highway  traffic . The major  issue  here  is the 
left turn  from   Tumkur  side towards  Hebbal  due to reduced  carriageway  width  
and absence  of bus  bays .
The major  issues  noted  at this junction  leading  for severe  traffic  congestions  
include  (Figure  63-64):
•Left turning  vehicles  from  Peenya / Tumkuru  moving  towards  Hebbal  on 
the  outer  ring road  result  in congestion  due to narrow  turning  radius .
•Due to the reduced  carriageway  and limited  scope  of road  widening  of the  
presence  of army  land  on the left-hand  side,  things  have  become  more   
problematic .72
✓If the abutting defence land can be acquired for creating an additional lane  for
thebus bay, then most oftheproblem issolved and congestion canbe eased  
out. ( Figure 63 )
✓Traffic signal optimization with new signal phase timings is recommended  
along with the other proposals mentioned  above.
✓Enforcement by BMTC and Traffic Police is the primary requirement, to ensure  
that BMTC buses do not stop at the turning, which is creating traffic  chaos.
✓Educating  the commuters  and pedestrians  need  to be done  to get discipline   
among  all the road  users . This is important  because  the commuters  do not  
follow  the road  rules  and hence  need  to educate  them .
`Conceptual plans foralltheabove recommendations areshown inthe
following  Figure 64 . 
Figure 63. Solution to Decongest the bottleneck of GorguntepalyaFigure 64. Conceptual Drawing of the Junction for Left Turning near Taj 
Vivanta
Benefits:
➢By acquiring  part of defense  land  at the turning,  as shown  in the 
conceptual   plan,  a separate  bus lane can be developed  which  will make  
the buses  move   in the dedicated  lane and the other  traffic  can move  
without  any hindrance .Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
73
`The bus stop isthefirst point ofcontact between thepassenger and thebus service .
Toimprove thequality ofbusservice, thebusstop should berecognized asacrucial
element .Busstop layout should enable safe and smooth flow ofbusand passengers .
Atthis junction, itisobserved that congestion isoccurring atthejunction due to
buses, which aredecelerating, stopping and accelerating onthecarriageway and
accidents occur due tolack offacilities forsafe passenger movements atbus stops .100 Ft ring road Bus stop  Issue
Even though thebus bay islocated about  50meters away from thejunction
towards Tumkur, theBMTC buss, theKSRTC buses and thePrivate buses tend to
stop atthe junction itself, instead of stopping atthe designated  bus bay . This  is 
creating  congestion  and blocking  the traffic  near  the junction .
Figure 65 Bus Stop Issue at 100ft Ring Road
The buses arestopping parallel toeach other, thus taking away almost three lanes
during thepeak hours .Once thebuses stop, long traffic queues areseen behind the
buses, which completely obstruct theintersection flow, thereby resulting injunction
delays . (Figure  65
 Figure 66. 100ft Ring Road Junction LocationComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
74
✓Since people arereluctant towalk tilltheauthorized busbays/bus
stop located 50meters away from thejunction, there isaneed todo
aminor geometric correction atthejunction toforce thepeople
towards thebusstop .
✓Part ofthejunction needs toberedesigned bycreating abulb at
thecorner ofORR and NH going towards Tumkur asshown in
the Figure .This will help in forcing  the buses  to enter  the 
authorized  bus stop rather  than  stopping  at the  junction .
✓Once  the Bulb  is created  the entire  footpath  needs  to be installed  
with  railings   so that commuters  don’t  come  on the carriageway .
✓Enforcement  by BMTC  and Traffic  Police  is the primary  
requirement  to ensure   that BMTC  buses  and other  interstate  
buses  don’t  stop  at the turning .
Figure  67 Shows  the conceptual  drawing  of the Junction  considering  all 
the recommendations  mentioned  above .
`
Figure 67. Conceptual Drawing of the Junction at 100ft Outer Ring RoadRecommendations :
Benefits :
➢The buses  will be forced  to stop  at the authorized  bus stops .
➢Commuters  will have  no option  but to move  towards  the 
designated  bus stop  as the railings  will guide  the pathway  
towards  the bus stop .
➢Long  vehicular  queue  lengths  will be eliminated .
➢Vehicular  speeds  will increase  and delays  will be reduced .
➢Above  all, the safety  of commuters  and pedestrians  will be 
achieved
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
75
Detailed observation atthislocation shows :
•Metro pillars starting from number 401to394arecurrently opened
foraccess from either side below the metro line, resulting in
multiple crisscrossing ofvehicles that arevery unsafe and results in
accidents .
•Three types ofTraffic flow patterns areobserved atthis location -
one from the Expressway, theother istheat-grade traffic from
Jalahalli side onNH and the last one isthefeeder road traffic
coming from HMT main road .
•It is measured   that the speeds are  different   on these  three  
different   corridors,   which  is the  main  reason   for  accidents   
during   merging   and  diverging .
•Speeds  of the vehicles,  which  are merging  and diverging  through  
these  pillars,  are more   than  60 kmph  and in the absence  of speed  
calming  measures,  the accident   rate is increasing  at this location .
`•Access control management is the need of the hour. Access for the 
vehicles  coming from HMT roadside should be given only from 
pillar number 400 to  398.
•Access should be closed from pillar number 398 to 395 using 
precast medians.
•Access should be opened from pillar number 395 onwards for 
the traffic  coming from Tumkur side moving towards
Yeshwanthpur.
•To control vehicular speeds on all the three roads,
1.Raised speed breakers should be provided on the service road 
to control  the speeds of vehicles coming from HMT main road.
2.Thermoplastic 15 mm thick rumble strips should be provided 
for the road  coming from Peenya metro station and for the 
expressway as per IRC: 99 -2018.Figure 68. Multiple access points at Peenya Metro stationFigure 69. Issues at Peenya Metro Station
Recommendations :This isagood example ofnegligence engineering bytheconcerned authorities .It
isamajor road safety issue due tomultiple access provided ontheRHS in
between the metro pillars  (Figure  68-69).The vehicles coming from HMT main
road canenter any oftheopenings provided between themetro pillars toreach
theNH, resulting inaccidents and congestion during thepeak hours .These
multiple accesses need tobecontrolled inanengineering way and organised
access need tobedesigned .Multiple Access through Metro Pillars - Peenya  Station
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
76
`➢Safe and controlled access will be achieved.
➢Accidents happening due to merging and diverging will be  
constrained.
Figure 70. Conceptual Drawing For Access Control Management at Peenya 
Metro StationBenefits :
SRS Junction – Bottleneck on LHS
Figure 71. SRS Junction.
•Lane  width  of the service  road   reduces  from  14 meters  to 5  meters  in 
a pan of 10 meters  at  the junction,  thereby  increasing   the delays  at the 
junction .
•The main  carriageway  and the service  road  are divided  with  railings,  
which  is  another  reason  for the delay  at the junction . The vehicles  
coming  on the  service  road  cannot  merge  on the main  carriageway  
due to these  railings  and  thus  vehicles  start  queuing  up leading  to 
severe  congestion  for a length  of about  70 meters .Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
It is observed  that the road  width  on  the  existing  service  lane on the 
LHS   reduces  abruptly,  which  results  in  traffic  congestion  due to the 
presence   of an abutting  building . The traffic  is  choked  up at the 
junction . The  detailed  observations  are as given   below  (Figure  71):
77
`✓With thelimited scope ofland acquisition atthejunction, itisproposed that the
central median/ railings between the service road and the main should be
removed  for the length  of 80 meters ;thiswill improve thespeeds onthecorridor .
✓By opening the mouth of the junction, the congestions will be reduced  
drastically.
✓Once the below recommendations are done  (Figure 73 ), signal optimization 
needs to  be done with new signal phase timings.  
➢Once the signal optimization is done, signal delays will be reduced drastically.
➢By opening the mouth of the junction congestions will also get  
reduced.
`
Figure 72. Issues at SRS Junction.Figure 73. Recommendations for Issues at SRS Junction.Recommendations :
Benefits :
Jalahalli Junction – Congestion due to bus stop location
80 mComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
Bus stop  layout  should  enable  safe and smooth  flow  of bus and passengers . At 
this  junction,  a bus bay is constructed  before  the junction  to have  safe access  
but  negligence  from  both  the commuters  and the BMTC  buses  have  resulted  
in a chaotic   situation  at the junction .
At Jalahalli  junction,  it is observed  that congestion  is occurring  due to BMTC  
and KSRTC   buses  along  with  private  buses,  which  are decelerating,  stopping  
and accelerating   on the main  carriageway  as well as on the service  road . The 
service  road  here  is very   narrow  with  a width  of 5 meters  and the commuters  
occupy  almost  2 metres  of the  road  by standing  on the road  and occupying  
the road  space .78
The service  road  is separated from themain carriageway byrailings .Due toacute entry, thebuses tend topile upatthejunction and thespill over
isobserved onthemain carriageway .The commuters stop randomly ontheservice road, atthejunction and atthemain carriageway making the
things even problematic .This situation atJalahalli junction makes itoneofthecongested intersections onthestudy corridor . (Figure  74-75)
`✓The railings in-between theservice road and themain
carriageway need toberemoved foradistance of100
meters, after thejunction sothat thebuses can easily
enter theservice road .
✓Once therailings areremoved, theunauthorised bus
stop created onthe main carriageway will be
eliminated .
✓Existing bus bays should be made touse by
enforcement through BMTC and Traffic Police for
better functioning .
`Figure 74. Issues at Jalahalli 
Junction.
Figure 75. Issues at Jalahalli Junction.Recommendations :
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
79
✓Since sufficient space isavailable below the metro
alignment, proper space management isrequired,
creating market space forthevendors .This will create
more space toaccommodate vendors, pedestrians and
avoid unauthorized on-street parking which is
resulting intraffic congestion . (Figure  76)
✓Pedestrian walkways with proper parking facility need
tobedesigned toachieve safe access atvendor zone
below themetro pillars .
✓Overall, awell -planned vendor zone with allthe
facilities needs tobedesigned and developed tothesafe
tone oftheoldest market ofthecity. (Figure  76 & 77)
`Figure 76. Proposed Vendor Zone from Dasarahalli to Jalahalli.
Benefits :Recommendations :
➢Congestion  free service  road .
➢Architecturally  well -planned  Vendor  
zone  can be developed .
Figure 77. Proposed Vendor Zone Cross section.Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
80
`
Figure 78. Proposed Vendor Zone from Dasarahalli to Jalahalli.Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
81
`Itisobserved that pedestrian safety along the corridor iscompletely
neglected due towhich safety ofpedestrians atmany locations is
compromised and many fatal accidents have occurred .
Because none ofthe metro stations from Peenya toNagasandra have
accessibility forpedestrians from theRHS, asallthemetro stations areon
theLHS .It is recommended to construct five pedestrian skywalk facilities to the 
following  metro stations to make sure the commuters can access the 
metro station safely  (Figure 79 ).
1.Peenya Metro station
2.Peenya Industrial Area
3.Jalahalli Metro Station.
4.Dasarahalli Metro station.
5.Nagasandra Metro Station
Figure 79. Proposed Pedestrian Skywalks at Metro Stations along the 
corridorRecommendations:Issue of Pedestrian Access to Metro Stations Along the 
Corridor
Figure 80 Proposed Pedestrian Skywalks at Metro Stations along the corridor
Benefits:
➢Pedestrians/commuters can access the metro stations  safely.
➢Metro can generate more  ridership.
➢Pedestrian – Vehicle crashes can be  controlled.
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
82
`
 Figure 81. Map showing issues along the corridor.Key Map Issues along Section A of Corridor 1Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
83
Corridor 1 Section C: Old Madras Road: From Queens Road Junction to Lowry School JunctionComprehensive Traffic Management Plan
52The sixth  corridor  to be undertaken  for the corridor  improvement  study  is the Old Madras  Road  Corridor,  which  starts  from  Queens’s  Road  
junction  near  Mahatma  Gandhi  Circle  to Lowry  school  Junction  near  K.R.Puram  Bridge . As shown  in Figure  82
It is one of the busiest  corridors  in the  city. It is the major  lifeline,  which  connects  central  and the east parts  of the city. Starting  from  the core 
central  areas  like M.G Road,  Lavelle  road,  Cubbon  park  in the center  to Baiyappanahalli,  K.R Puram  in the east.
Some  of the main  features  of the corridor  are:
•This  corridor  starts  as a Sub Arterial  road  from  M.G Road  until  Murphy  road  and     ends  as Arterial  road,  ,from  Murphy  road  till K.R.  
Puram .  The lane widths  vary  from  4 lanes  to 6 lanes  divided  two way . 
•Length  of the study  corridor  is 8.5 km. 
•The road  surface  is varying  from  bituminous .
•There  are thirteen  signalized  junctions  along  the corridor .
•Metro  Rail runs  along  the corridor  from  Anil  Kumar  Circle  to Baiyappanahalli . At the same  time  stretch  from  Lowry  junction  to Tin Factory  
Metro  is under  construction .Figure 82 Old Madras Road
306Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
Corridor 1 Section C: Old Madras Road: From Queens Road Junction to Lowry School 
Junction
84
Landmarks,  Attraction   & Production  Centers
The corridor  attracts  many  work  trips  due to the presence  of commercial  establishments,  Government  Office,  Hotels,  Movie  theatres,  
Malls,  Parks  etc. Figure  83
The corridor  houses  many  major  attraction  points  such  as:
 
•One of the biggest and famous shopping streets of the city, i.e. M.G Road and the 
Brigade road  are is located on this corridor. 
•One of the oldest and biggest parks i.e. Cubbon Park  is located along the corridor.
• The corridor also houses heritage and important structures like St Mark’s 
Cathedral,  LIC Building, Utility Building, Hard Rock Café, Holy Trinity Church 
etc. 
•Prominent government institutions like LIC, Cauvery Emporium, Civil Courts, 
KUIDFC etc. are on the corridor.
•The corridor also has the famous Chinnaswamy Cricket Stadium, which attracts 
lot of trips during the matches.
•The corridor and the areas adjacent to the study corridor houses  various have Star 
Hotels like Taj, Oberoi, Conrad, The Park, The Chancery etc.The landmarks mentioned above attract huge trips on both weekdays as well as on 
weekends. 
LIC Building on M.G. Road Hard Rock Cafe on M.G. Road
Figure 84. Attraction/ Generation Entities/ Areas photographsFigure 83. Attraction/ Generation Entities/ Areas
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
85
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
52
Halasuru Market Baiyappanahalli Metro Station  
Gopalan Mall K.R. Puram Railway Station 
Cauvery Emporium on M.G. Road
M.G. Road
Taj Hotel 
 Oberoi 
Hotel Brigade Road
Major  Bus Stops  along  the Corridor
There  are seventeen  bus stops  located  along  the corridor . Dedicated  bus 
bays  are designed  near  Baiyappanahalli  metro  station  and Tin Factory  
and at the remaining  bus stops,  there  are no bus bays . The absence  of 
bus bays  results  in buses  stopping  on the carriageway  itself . Thus  
resulting  in traffic  congestions . All the Bus Stop  locations  are as shown  
in the Figure  85-87
Bus Stop Condition along the corridor Bus Bay near Tin Factory
Figure 85. Attraction/ Generation Entities/ Areas photographs Figure 87. Bus Stop Condition 308Figure 86. Attraction/ Generation Entities/ Areas photographsComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
86
Comprehensive Traffic Management 
Plan
52Corridor  Characteristics
The entire  corridor  is a varying  from  4 Lane  to 6 lane two way  divided  with  footpath  on either  side. The entire  corridor  surface  is 
bituminous  and the condition  of the road  surface  is good . 
It is also observe  that for a small  stretch  from  Halasuru  Police  station  to Old madras  road  near  Bharath  Petrol  Bunk  the footpath  condition  is 
not good . As shown  in Figures  89.Figure 88. Bus Stops Along Corridor
309
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
87
Comprehensive Traffic Management 
Plan
M.G. Road @ Trinity Metro Station
 @ Vivekananda Metro Station @ Halasuru Police Station
@ Baiyappanahalli @ Vivekananda Metro Station
@ Tin factory Interchange @ K.R.Puram Hanging Bridge
@ Baiyapanahalli Metro Station @ HalasuruIt is observed  that on certain  stretches  of road,  footpath  condition  is good  
but on majority  of the locations,  the condition  of the footpath  is poor . The 
pedestrian  facilities  along  the corridor  are largely  neglected . There  is are 
only  It is observed  that on certain  stretches  of road,  footpath  condition  is 
good  but on majority  of the locations,  the condition  of the footpath  is poor . 
The pedestrian  facilities  along  the corridor  are largely  neglected . There  are 
only  two pedestrian  skywalks  along  entire  corridor . Footpaths  are 
encroached  upon  near  the Halasuru  Market  area two pedestrian  skywalk s 
along  entire  corridor . 
Refer Figure 91
Near K.R. Puram Skywalk Near Vivekananda Metro Station
At grade Pedestrian Crossing near Benniganahalli
Figure 90 Corridor Characteristics 5  Existing Footpaths/Pedestrian Facilities
Figure 91. Existing footpaths/pedestrian facilities 310Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
88
Swamy Vivekananda Road Near KUIFDC Near Mayo Hall Near Halasuru Metro station
Near old Madras road, Indiranagar Police Station Near Indiranagar Bus Depot
Figure 92. Existing footpaths/pedestrian facilities
311There  are nine   major  intersections  where  maximum  merging  and diverging  of 
the traffic  takes  place . The major  intersections  are as shown  in Figure  93 and 
mentioned  below :
1.Mahatma  Gandhi  Circle - 4 arm Signalized  intersection .
2.Anil  Kumar  Circle – 4 arm Signalized  intersection .
3.Electronic  B. Bus stop  Circle  – 3 arm Signalized  intersection .
4.Trinity  Circle - 4 arm Signalized  intersection . 
5.Halasuru  Police  Station  Circle - 4 arm Signalized  intersection
6.Indiranagar  Double  Road  Junction   – 3 arm Signalized  intersection .
7.Suranjandas  Road  Junction   -3 arm signalized  intersection .
8.Benniganahalli  Junction  – 3 arm signalized  intersection .
9.K.R. Puram  Junction  - 3 arm signalized  intersection .6 Major  Junctions
Figure 93. Critical junctions along old 
madras roadComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
89
The corridor  lacks  right  signboards  at the right  locations ; the signboards  do not have  good  foundation  and most  of the signboards  are either  damaged  or not relevant  
to the site.  Sign  boards  are installed  on the shoulders  which  is very  dangerous  for the road  users . Road  safety  aspects  are also ignored  along  the corridor  largely,  
which  is of major  concern . Some  of the safety  issues  are shown  in Figure  330:
Signboard fixed on shoulders Poor  Foundation7 Signage/  Markings/  Signals
311
Median End Treatment not done Water Valve is projected out 
dangerously  
Signboard Installed on Shoulder and fallen due to Poor foundation
Pedestrians Jumping the central Median to cross 
the roadIrrelevant Sign Board in the middle of the road
Damaged Road Surface near Baiyappanahalli
 Sign Board not as per IRC near Trinity Circle 
Figure 94. Signage/ marking/signals
•Pedestrian  crossings  are completely  neglected  at certain  stretches  
of the corridor .  Especially  near  Benniganahalli  RoB where  people  
are seen  jumping  the central  median  and crossing  the road,  which  
is resulting  in pedestrian  vehicle  conflicts . There  is no pedestrian  
crossing  facility  available  at this location  thereby  compromising  on 
the pedestrian  safety . Figure  95
Figure 95. Pedestrian crossingComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
90
Comprehensive Traffic Management 
Plan•Pedestrian  crossing  facility  is provided  at two only  two locations  -, 
one of the locations   is the very  critical  i.e. at K.R Puram  bridge  and 
is serving  the its purpose  of, which  is reducing  the pedestrian  
vehicle  conflicts  and reducing  the pedestrian  fatalities . 
•Expect  Except  at two locations,  none  of the bus stops  have  the bus 
bays  designed  along  the corridor,  thus  the commuter  safety  is 
compromised .  Absence  of bus bays  is adding  up to buses  stopping  
on the carriageway  leading  to congestion  during  the peak  hours . 
•Road  markings  are missing  for the entire  corridor  stretch . 
Especially,  on old Madras  road,  Swami  Vivekananda  Road . In the 
absence  of road  markings,  traffic  discipline  cannot  be attained .  
•Road  safety  furniture  like cat eyes,  solar  blinkers  are missing  all 
along  the corridor,  which  are required  for safe access  during  night . 
•Road  surface  at certain  points  is very  bad resulting  in two-wheeler  
skidding,  which  might  be fatal,  especially  at near  Baiyappanahalli,  
Halasuru  Metro  station . 
•Footpaths  are in very  bad condition,  which  need  to be rectified  on 
priority ; especially  on Swami  Vivekananda  Road,  the granite  slabs  
damaged . Figure  96
Figure 96. Damaged road 312
Figure 97 Damaged footpaths slabsComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
91
It is observed  that majority  of the land  use pattern  along  the corridor  is commercial  and defence   land . It is also observed  that most  of the 
existing  residential  land  uses  have  been  used  for commercial  purposes  as shown  in Figure  98. 8 Land  Use along  the Corridor
Figure 98. Land use along old madras road313
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
92
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
9Traffic Survey Details
In order  to assess  the existing  traffic  and transport  characteristic  of the corridor  and to decide  on the type  of traffic  management  measures  
needed,  traffic  surveys  were  carried  out. The survey  particulars  are as presented  in the following  paragraphs  Figure  99 and  Table  20
Table 20. Study Corridors For Traffic Surveys
Figure 99. Traffic survey locationsComprehensive Traffic Management Plan
57Sl.No Type of Survey Quantity
1 Turning Volume Count 8 Intersections
2 Mid-block Count 1 Location
3 Pedestrian Count Survey 8 Intersections
4 Speed And Delay (Bus & Car) 8.5Km
5 Road Network Inventory 8.5 Km
6 Traffic Signal Phasing 7 intersections
314
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
93
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
9Traffic  Volume  Counts
Traffic  volume  count  survey  was conducted  at one Mid-block  location  and for the remaining  stretches  traffic  volumes  were  extracted  from  
the turning  volume  counts  conducted  along  the corridor . The vehicles  counted  were  converted  to Passenger  Car Units  (PCUs)  by adopting  
equivalent  PCUs . The PCUs  corresponding  to urban  roads  as per Highway  Capacity  Manual  were  used  and the Peak  Hour  Traffic  Volumes  
are as presented  in Table  21.
Table 21. Traffic volume countComprehensive Traffic Management Plan
57Among  the 12 Mid-Block  locations,  traffic  volume  between   Dickenson  road  junction  and Trinity  Circle  is found  to be the highest  with  5614  PCUs  
during  Morning  peak  hour  and 5934  PCUs  during  evening  peak  for the same  location . 315
Vehicles PCUs Vehicles PCUs Vehicles PCUs Vehicles PCUs
1Between Mahatma Gandhi 
Park Junction and Anil 
Kumble Circle10.15-11.15 2958 1998.08 5807 4272.69 19.30-20.30 2932 1978.62 5814 4206.64
2Between Anil Kumble Circle 
and Kamraj Road Junction11.00-12.00 3351 3445.73 6307 5686.42 19.00-20.00 3191 3497.22 6261 6193.46
3Between Kamraj Road 
Junction and Dikenson Road 
Junction10.45-11.15 3234 2117.68 5137 3661.55 18.45-19.45 3234 2117.68 5137 3661.55
4Between Dikenson Road 
Junction and Trinity Circle11.00-12.00 5614 4313.3 4715 3896.74 18.30-19.30 5934 4354.73 4607 3744.35
5Between Trinity Circle and 
Halasuru Junction11.00-12.00 4118 3144.52 5078 3768.61 18.30-19.30 4891 3262.83 5185 3887.77
6Between Halasuru Junction 
and CMH Road Junction10.00-11.00 4311 2410.15 3205 2114 19.30-20.30 4266 2453.06 3215 2125.54
7Between CMH Road Junction 
and Murphy Road Junction11.00-12.00 1624 1281.12 1827 1238.02 19.30-20.30 1654 1226.22 1890 1225.56
8Between Murphy Road 
Junction and Indiranagar 
Double Road Junction11.00-12.00 3841 3177.42 3718 2535.38 19.30-20.30 3863 3086.31 3806 2478.01
9Between Indiranagar Double 
Road Junction and 
Binnamangala Junction 9.15-10.15 4730 3241.87 5817 4599.22 18.15-19.15 4618 3186.53 5693 4304.6
10Between Binnamangala 
Junction and Suranjandas 
Road Junction9.15-10.15 4248 3317.58 4382 3645.37 18.15-19.15 4174 3215.58 4265 3398.23
11Between Suranjandas Road 
Junction and Varthur Road 
Junction10.15-11.15 4131 3726.29 4091 3529.36 19.30-20.30 4308 3802.55 4107 3563.31
12Between Varthur Road 
Junction and Tin Factory9.15-10.15 3016 4836.01 6062 7564.58 17.30-18.30 2778 4153.45 5849 7733.36Evening Peak Hour Volume
Towards K.R Puram Towards M.G Road Towards K.R Puram Towards M.G Road Sl. No Road NameMorning  Peak 
HourMorning Peak Hour Volume
Evening Peak 
HourComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
94
Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanVolume  to Capacity  Ratio  (V/C  Ratio)  is defined  as the ratio  of peak  hour  traffic  flow  rate to capacity  and Level  of Service  (LOS)  is defined  as 
the a qualitative  measure,  describing  operational  conditions  within  a traffic  stream  and their  perception  by the drivers/passengers . 
Universally,  LOS  is lettering  scheme  ranging  from  A to F. LOS  ‘A’ represents  highest  quality  of service  whereas  LOS  ‘F’ represents  heavily  
congested  flow  where  traffic  demand  exceeds  capacity . The service  measures  used  for defining  LOS  are density  and volume -to-capacity  
ratio . 
For computation  of V/C  Ratio  the capacity  values  have  been  adopted  based  on the road  geometrics  by applying  adjustment  factors  (as per 
Indo  Highway  Capacity  Manual  2012 -2017 ) conforming  to the site conditions . 
Adjustment  Factors
Several  factors  would  have  impact  on traffic  movement  and on capacity  as compared  to the base  section . The factors  considered  for 
assessment  of influence  on capacity  include  on-street  parking  manoeuvres ; entry  and exit of vehicles  from  access  road  and bus pull in and 
pull out manoeuvers  in bus bays  as well  as access  points . 
The level  of friction  is categorized  as low,  medium  and severe  based  on the extent  of resistance  or speed  reduction  to the flow  as compared  
to base  sections . The capacity  of the urban  road  section  is computed  using  the equation :
C= Co * FOP* FBS*FACWhere,
C= Actual  Capacity  (PCU/hr)
Co    = Base  Capacity  for Ideal  Condition  (PCU/hr)
FOP  = Adjustment  Factor  for On-street  Parking
FBS = Adjustment  Factor  for Bus Stops
FAC = Adjustment  Factor  for Access  Point
It was observed  that due to kerb  side bus stops  the effective  road  available  for movement  of other  vehicles  in the traffic  stream  reduces  
resulting  in the capacity  reduction
As the level  of friction  due to kerb  side bus stops  is high  (frequency  of buses> 30) the adjustment  factor  of 0.6 is considered  to compute  the 
actual  capacity .
It was also observed  that due to on-street  parking  between  Anil  Kumble  Circle  and Brigade  Road  Junction  there  is considerable  reduction  
in road  capacity  and the stream  speed  of traffic  flow . As the percentage  of intensity  in terms  of parking  segment  length  occupied  is around  
50%, the adjustment  factor  of 0.65 is considered  to compute  the actual  capacity  for this stretch . 
 The ratio  of peak  hour  traffic  flow  rate to capacity  (V/C  Ratio)  and the Level  of Service  (LOS)  of the road  sections  along  Old Madras  Road  
Corridor  are presented  in Table  22Volume  to Capacity  Ratio  (V/C)  and Level  of Service
316Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
95
Table 22. Volume to Capacity Ratio and Level of Service 
Towards K.R 
PuramTowards M.G 
RoadTowards K.R 
PuramTowards M.G 
RoadTowards K.R 
PuramTowards 
M.G RoadTowards K.R 
PuramTowards 
M.G RoadTowards K.R 
PuramTowards M.G RoadTowards K.R 
PuramTowards M.G RoadTowards K.R 
PuramTowards M.G 
Road
1Between Mahatma Gandhi Park 
Junction and Anil Kumble Circle 6 Lanes 4200 4200 1998.08 4272.69 0.5 1.0 LOS C LOS F 1979 4207 0.5 1.0 LOS C LOS F
2Between Anil Kumble Circle and 
Kamraj Road Junction4 Lane 1755 1755 3445.73 5686.42 2.0 3.2 LOS F LOS F 3497.22 6193.46 2.0 3.5 LOS F LOS F
3Between Kamraj Road Junction 
and Dikenson Road Junction6 Lane 4200 4200 2118 3662 0.5 0.9 LOS C LOS E 2118 3662 0.5 0.9 LOS C LOS E
4Between Dikenson Road Junction 
and Trinity Circle6 Lane 4200 4200 4313.3 3896.74 1.0 0.9 LOS F LOS E 4354.73 3744.35 1.0 0.9 LOS F LOS E
5Between Trinity Circle and 
Halasuru Junction4 Lane 2700 2700 3144.52 3768.61 1.2 1.4 LOS F LOS F 3262.83 3887.77 1.2 1.4 LOS F LOS F
6Between Halasuru Junction and 
CMH Road Junction3 lane 2160 2160 2410.15 2114 1.1 1.0 LOS F LOS E 2453.06 2125.54 1.1 1.0 LOS F LOS E
7Between CMH Road Junction and 
Murphy Road Junction4 Lane 2700 2700 1281.12 1238.02 0.5 0.5 LOS C LOS C 1226.22 1225.56 0.5 0.5 LOS C LOS C
8Between Murphy Road Junction 
and Indiranagar Double Road 
Junction4 Lane 1620 1620 3177.42 2535.38 2.0 1.6 LOS F LOS F 3086.31 2478.01 1.9 1.5 LOS F LOS F
9Between Indiranagar Double 
Road Junction and Binnamangala 
Junction 4 Lane 2700 2700 3241.87 4599.22 1.2 1.7 LOS F LOS F 3186.53 4304.6 1.2 1.6 LOS F LOS F
10Between Binnamangala Junction 
and Suranjandas Road Junction6 Lane 4200 4200 3317.58 3645.37 0.8 0.9  LOS D LOS E 3215.58 3398.23 0.8 0.8  LOS D  LOS D
11Between Suranjandas Road 
Junction and Varthur Road 
Junction6 Lane 4200 4200 3726.29 3529.36 0.9 0.8 LOS E  LOS D 3802.55 3563.31 0.9 0.8 LOS E  LOS D
12Between Varthur Road Junction 
and Tin Factory6 Lane 2520 4200 4836.01 7564.58 1.9 1.8 LOS F LOS F 4153.45 7733.36 1.6 1.8 LOS F LOS FSl. No.Morning Peak Evening Peak
V/C Ratio Level of Service* Evening Peak Hour Volume (PCUs) V/C Ratio Level of Service* Road Name Typology of RoadCapacity*
Morning Peak Hour Volume 
(PCUs)
317Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
96
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Volume  to Capacity  Ratio  (V/C)  along  
Old Madras  Road  Corridor
Figure 100 Volume to Capacity Ratios for Morning and Evening Peaks318It can be observed  that the traffic  
approaching  at all the locations  (except  
between  CMH  Road  Junction  and Murphy  
Road  Junction ) exceeds  beyond  the road  
capacity  resulting  in considerable  delay  
and queuing .  Figure  100.
The volume  to capacity  ratio  at most  of the 
stretches  of roads  exceeds  1.0 and the 
Level  of Service  is found  to Vary  between  
‘E’ and ‘F’ which  indicates  heavily  
congested  flow  where  traffic  demand  
exceeds  capacity .
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
97
Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanTraffic  Volume  at Junctions
The traffic  volumes  at intersections  help  in assessing  the traffic  volumes  at mid-block  locations  of the arms  of the intersection  which  together  
with  journey  speed  and road  inventory  data  aid in evaluating  the Level  of Service  (LOS)  of Urban  Arterials  and further,  the traffic  volumes  at 
mid-block  also establishes  the need  for safe pedestrian  crossing  facility  taking  into account  the pedestrian  crossing  volumes . 
 
 The vehicles  counted  were  converted  to Passenger  Car Units  (PCUs)  by adopting  equivalent  PCUs . Table  23
Table 23. Peak hour traffic volumes 
319
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
98
Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanSpeed  & delay  survey  provides  a link wise  estimate  of journey  time,  running  time  and delay . Speed  and Delay  Survey  was carried  out for Bus and 
Car separately  during  morning  and evening  peak  hours . In case of Car Speed  and Delay  Survey,  floating  car technique  has been  utilized  for 
obtaining  data  wherein  the driver  is instructed  to follow  the designated  route  course,  while  maintaining  the average  speed  of other  traffic  and 
accompanied  by trained  members  of the team  who  record  the cumulative  time  at specified  timing  points  to ensure  obtaining  the average  link 
travel  time  of the road  network . Speed  and Delay
Table 24. Bus Speed and Delay - Towards KR Puram (Morning Peak)
320The overall  travel  speed  generally  referred  to as journey  speed  is the effective  speed  between  two points  and is computed  as the distance  divided  
by the total  time  taken  by the vehicle  to complete  the journey  including  delays  incurred  en-route . 
The direction -wise  abstract  on analysis  along  Old Madras  Road  Corridor  are furnished  in Table  24 to Table  27. The average  bus journey  speed  for 
both  morning  and evening  peak  hour  is shown  in Figure  101-102
Length DelayJourney 
TimeRunning 
Tim
(in Km) (sec) (Sec) E (Sec)
1 Two Way Shivaji NagarBowring 
Hospital 
Junction0.19 0 42 42 16 16
2 One WayBowring 
Hospital 
JunctionCubbon Road 
Junction0.34 15 103 88 12 14
3 Two WayCubbon 
Road 
JunctionKamaraj Road 
Junction0.61 65 159 94 14 23Narrow roads and 
traffic flow delays
4 Two WayKamaraj 
Road 
JunctionDickenson 
Road Junction0.67 83 212 129 11 19 Signal Delays 
5 Two WayDickenson 
Road 
JunctionMurphy Road x 
S.V Road 
Junction2.53 65 497 432 18 21 Signal Delays 
6 Two WayMurphy 
Road x S.V 
Road 
JunctionBinnamangala 
Junction1.04 0 256 256 15 15
7 Two WayBinnamanga
la JunctionSuranjandas 
Road Junction0.87 84 242 158 13 20Traffic flow delay  & 
Pedestrai crossings
8 Two WaySuranjandas 
Road 
JunctionVarthur Road 
Junction1.08 87 319 232 12 17Traffic flow delay  & 
Pedestrai crossings
9 Two WayVarthur 
Road 
JunctionLowry School 
Junction2.85 229 849 620 12 17Unsuthorized 
stoppage of buses 
at flyover & Narrow 
road, congestion at 
K.R.Puram bridge
14 18 AVERAGEReasons for Delay Sl.No.Carriagew
ay 
CategoryFrom Node To NodeJourney 
Speed 
(Kmph)Running 
Speed 
(Kmph)Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
99
Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanTable 25 Bus Speed and Delay - Towards KR Puram (Morning ) Peak
321
Length
(in Km)
1 Two WayLowry Memorial 
School JunctionVarthur Road 
Junction2.85 618 1032 414 10 25Metro construction 
works, Merging traffic 
from K.R.Puram
2 Two WayVarthur Road 
JunctionSuranjandas 
Road Junction1.08 200 321 121 12 32Narrow railway bridge, 
unorganized bus 
stoppage, traffic flow 
delay
3 Two WaySuranjandas 
Das Road 
JunctionBinnamangala 
Junction0.87 71 240 169 13 19Signal Delay and Traffic 
flow delay
4 Two WayBinnamangala 
JunctionMurphy Road x 
S.V Road 
Junction1.04 47 252 205 15 18Signal Delay and Traffic 
flow delay
5 Two WayMurphy Road x 
S.V Road 
JunctionHalasuru Police 
Station 
Junction0.99 116 340 224 10 16Narrow roads, 
unscientific junction  
geometrics, Signal Delay 
and Traffic flow delay
6 Two WayHalasuru Police 
Station CircleTrinity Circle 0.64 160 235 75 10 31Narrow road & Signal 
Delay
7 Two Way Trinity CircleUlsoor Road 
Junction0.23 0 47 47 18 18
8 Two WayUlsoor Road 
JunctionDickenson 
Road Junction0.61 102 243 141 9 16Signal Delay and Traffic 
flow delay
9 Two WayDickenson Road 
JunctionCubbon Road 
Junction0.67 90 205 115 12 21Signal Delay and Traffic 
flow delay
10 Two WayCubbon Road 
JunctionKamaraj Road 
Junction0.66 33 179 146 13 16 Traffic flow delay
11 Two WayKamaraj Road 
JunctionCentral Street 
Junction0.72 98 175 77 15 34Signal Delay and Traffic 
flow delay
12 One WayCentral Street 
JunctionShivaji Nagar 
Bus stand0.41 0 75 75 20 20
13 22Runnin
g Time  
(Sec)Journey 
 Speed  
(Kmph)Running 
Speed 
(Kmph)
AVERAGEReasons for Delay Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To NodeDelay  
(Sec)Journey 
Time  
(Sec)Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
100
Comprehensive Traffic Management 
PlanTable 26 Bus Speed and Delay - Towards KR Puram (Evening Peak)
Table 108 Bus Speed and Delay - Towards MG Road (Evening Peak)
)
322
Length
(in Km)
1 Two Way Shivaji NagarBowring 
Hospital 
Junction0.19 0 47 47 15 15
2 One WayBowring Hospital 
JunctionCubbon Road 
Junction0.34 54 254 200 5 6Traffic flow delay  & 
Pedestrai crossings
3 Two WayCubbon Road 
JunctionKamaraj Road 
Junction0.61 144 185 41 12 54Narrow roads and traffic 
flow delays
4 Two WayKamaraj Road 
JunctionDickenson 
Road Junction0.67 97 245 148 10 16Signal Delays & Traffic 
flow delays
5 Two WayDickenson Road 
JunctionMurphy Road x 
S.V Road 
Junction2.53 126 494 368 18 25Signal Delays & Traffic 
flow delays
6 Two WayMurphy Road x 
S.V Road 
JunctionBinnamangala 
Junction1.04 105 263 158 14 24Signal Delays & Traffic 
flow delays
7 Two WayBinnamangala 
JunctionSuranjandas 
Road Junction0.87 192 412 220 8 14Traffic flow delay  & 
Pedestrai crossings
8 Two WaySuranjandas 
Road JunctionVarthur Road 
Junction1.08 73 288 215 14 18Traffic flow delay  & 
Pedestrai crossings
9 Two WayVarthur Road 
JunctionLowry School 
Junction2.85 353 839 486 12 21Unsuthorized stoppage 
of buses at flyover & 
Narrow road, congestion 
at K.R.Puram bridge
12 21Journey 
Time  
(Sec)Runnin
g Time  
(Sec)Journey 
 Speed  
(Kmph)Running 
Speed 
(Kmph)
AVERAGEReasons for Delay Sl.No.Carriageway 
 CategoryFrom Node To NodeDelay  
(Sec)Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
101
Comprehensive Traffic Management 
Plan
It was observed  that the lower  journey  speeds  are mainly  due to traffic  congestion  and the delays  are mostly  occurring  at junctions . The 
Average  Bus Journey  Speed  is approximately  13 Kmph  during  morning  peak  hour  and 11 kmph  during  evening  peak  hour .Table 27 Bus Speed and Delay - Towards MG Road (Evening Peak)
323
Length
(in Km)
1 Two WayLowry Memorial 
School JunctionVarthur Road 
Junction2.85 681 1490 809 7 13Metro construction 
works, Merging traffic 
from K.R.Puram
2 Two WayVarthur Road 
JunctionSuranjandas 
Road Junction1.08 308 493 185 8 21Narrow railway bridge, 
unorganized bus 
stoppage, traffic flow 
delay
3 Two WaySuranjandas 
Das Road 
JunctionBinnamangala 
Junction0.87 99 245 146 13 21Signal Delay and Traffic 
flow delay
4 Two WayBinnamangala 
JunctionMurphy Road x 
S.V Road 
Junction1.04 29 247 218 15 17Signal Delay and Traffic 
flow delay
5 Two WayMurphy Road x 
S.V Road 
JunctionHalasuru Police 
Station 
Junction0.99 354 697 343 5 10Narrow roads, 
unscientific junction  
geometrics, Signal Delay 
and Traffic flow delay
6 Two WayHalasuru Police 
Station CircleTrinity Circle 0.64 51 149 98 15 24Narrow road & Signal 
Delay
7 Two Way Trinity CircleUlsoor Road 
Junction0.23 0 128 128 6 6
8 Two WayUlsoor Road 
JunctionDickenson 
Road Junction0.61 0 140 140 16 16
9 Two WayDickenson Road 
JunctionCubbon Road 
Junction0.67 38 241 203 10 12Signal Delay and Traffic 
flow delay
10 Two WayCubbon Road 
JunctionKamaraj Road 
Junction0.66 29 179 150 13 16 Traffic flow delay
11 Two WayKamaraj Road 
JunctionCentral Street 
Junction0.72 85 182 97 14 27Signal Delay and Traffic 
flow delay
12 One WayCentral Street 
JunctionShivaji Nagar 
Bus stand0.41 36 176 140 8 11
11 16Runnin
g Time  
(Sec)Journey 
 Speed  
(Kmph)Running 
Speed 
(Kmph)
AVERAGEReasons for Delay Sl.No.Carriageway 
 CategoryFrom Node To NodeDelay  
(Sec)Journey 
Time  
(Sec)Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
102
Comprehensive Traffic Management 
Plan
Figure 101.  Average Bus Speed and Delay (Morning Peak)324
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
103
Comprehensive Traffic Management 
Plan
Figure 102.  Average Bus Speed and Delay (Evening  Peak)325
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
104
Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanThe Average  Car Journey  speeds  are shown  below  in  Table  28-31.Car Speed  and Delay
Table  28 Car Speed  & Deal  Details  – Towards  KR Puram  (Morning  Peak)
326
1 Two WayCubbon Road 
JunctionKamaraj Road 
Junction0.61 59 143 84 15 26Signal Delay& 
Traffic flow delay
2 Two WayKamaraj Road 
JunctionDickenson Road 
Junction0.65 78 176 98 13 24Signal Delay& 
Traffic flow delay
3 Two WayDickenson Road 
JunctionMurphy Road x S.V 
Road Junction2.53 111 587 476 16 19Signal Delay& 
Traffic flow delay, 
Narrow roads
4 Two WayMurphy Road x S.V 
Road JunctionBinnamangala 
Junction1.04 43 261 218 14 17Signal Delay& 
Traffic flow delay
5 Two WayBinnamangala 
JunctionSuranjandas Road 
Junction0.87 71 209 138 15 23Signal Delay& 
Traffic flow delay
6 Two WaySuranjandas Road 
JunctionVarthur Road 
Junction1.08 94 234 140 17 28Signal Delay& 
Traffic flow delay
7 Two WayVarthur Road 
JunctionLowry School 
Junction2.85 193 668 475 15 22Unsuthorized 
stoppage of buses 
at flyover & 
Narrow road, 
congestion at 
K.R.Puram bridge
15 23Running 
Time  
(Sec)Journey Speed  
(Kmph)Running 
Speed 
(Kmph)
AVERAGEReasons for the 
Dealy Length 
 in kmSl.NoCarriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To NodeDelay  
(Sec)Journe
y Time  
(Sec)The Average  Car Journey  Speed  is approximately  15 Kmph  during  morning   peak  hour  towards  K.R.Puram . Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
105
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
The Average  Car Journey  Speed  is approximately  15 Kmph  during  evening  peak  hour  towards  K.R.Puram
326
1 Two WayLowry School 
JunctionVarthur Road 
Junction2.85 168 687 519 15 20Metro construction works, 
Merging traffic from 
K.R.Puram
2 Two WayVarthur Road 
JunctionSuranjandas Road 
Junction1.08 78 269 191 14 20Narrow railway bridge, 
unorganized bus 
stoppage, traffic flow delay
3 Two WaySuranjandas Road 
JunctionBinnamangala 
Junction0.87 56 203 147 15 21Signal Delay and Traffic 
flow delay
4 Two WayBinnamangala 
JunctionMurphy Road x S.V 
Road Junction1.04 67 243 176 15 21Signal Delay and Traffic 
flow delay
5 Two WayMurphy Road x S.V 
Road JunctionDickenson Road 
Junction2.53 98 527 429 17 21Narrow roads, unscientific 
junction  geometrics, 
Signal Delay and Traffic 
flow delay
6 Two WayDickenson Road 
JunctionKamaraj Road 
Junction0.65 71 152 81 15 29Signal Delay and Traffic 
flow delay
7 Two WayKamaraj Road 
JunctionCubbon Road 
Junction0.61 81 144 63 15 35Signal Delay and Traffic 
flow delay
15 24Running 
Time  
(Sec)Journey 
Speed  
(Kmph)Running 
Speed 
(Kmph)
AVERAGEReasons for the Dealy Length 
in KmSl.No.Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To NodeDelay  
(Sec)Journey 
Time  
(Sec)Table   29 Car Speed  & Deal  Details  – Towards  KR Puram  (Evening   Peak)Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
106
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
The Average  Car Journey  Speed  is approximately  15 Kmph  during  morning  peak  hour . towards  M.G. Road  
327Table  30 Car Speed  & Deal  Details  – Towards  M.G. Road  (Morning    Peak)
Length
(in Km)
1 Two WayCubbon Road 
JunctionKamaraj Road 
Junction0.61 72 146 74 15 30Signal Delay& Traffic flow 
delay
2 Two WayKamaraj Road 
JunctionDickenson Road 
Junction0.65 88 185 97 13 24Signal Delay& Traffic flow 
delay
3 Two WayDickenson Road 
JunctionMurphy Road x S.V 
Road Junction2.53 121 587 466 16 20Signal Delay& Traffic flow 
delay, Narrow roads
4 Two WayMurphy Road x S.V 
Road JunctionBinnamangala 
Junction1.04 65 249 184 15 20Signal Delay& Traffic flow 
delay
5 Two WayBinnamangala 
JunctionSuranjandas Road 
Junction0.87 95 200 105 16 30Signal Delay& Traffic flow 
delay
6 Two WaySuranjandas Road 
JunctionVarthur Road 
Junction1.08 103 236 133 16 29Signal Delay& Traffic flow 
delay
7 Two WayVarthur Road 
JunctionLowry School 
Junction2.85 218 759 541 14 19Unsuthorized stoppage of 
buses at flyover & Narrow 
road, congestion at 
K.R.Puram bridge
15 25Running 
Time  
(Sec)Journey 
Speed  
(Kmph)Running 
Speed 
(Kmph)
AVERAGEReasons for the Dealy Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To NodeDelay  
(Sec)Journey 
Time  
(Sec)Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
107
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
The Average  Car Journey  Speed  is approximately  14 Kmph  during  evening  peak  hour  towards  M.G.Road .
328Table  31 Car Speed  & Deal  Details  – Towards  KR Puram  (Evening   Peak)
Sl.No.Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To NodeLength(in 
Km)Delay  
(Sec)Journey 
Time  
(Sec)Running 
Time  
(Sec)Journey 
Speed  
(Kmph)Running 
Speed 
(Kmph)Reasons for the Delay
1 Two WayLowry School 
JunctionVarthur Road 
Junction2.85 174 684 510 15 20Metro construction works, 
Merging traffic from 
K.R.Puram
2 Two WayVarthur Road 
JunctionSuranjandas Road 
Junction1.08 94 259 165 15 24Narrow railway bridge, 
unorganized bus 
stoppage, traffic flow delay
3 Two WaySuranjandas Road 
JunctionBinnamangala 
Junction0.87 73 226 153 14 20Signal Delay and Traffic 
flow delay
4 Two WayBinnamangala 
JunctionMurphy Road x S.V 
Road Junction1.04 82 243 161 15 23Signal Delay and Traffic 
flow delay
5 Two WayMurphy Road x S.V 
Road JunctionDickenson Road 
Junction2.53 119 613 494 15 18Narrow roads, unscientific 
junction  geometrics, 
Signal Delay and Traffic 
flow delay
6 Two WayDickenson Road 
JunctionKamaraj Road 
Junction0.65 83 169 86 14 27Signal Delay and Traffic 
flow delay
7 Two WayKamaraj Road 
JunctionCubbon Road 
Junction0.61 93 163 70 13 31Signal Delay and Traffic 
flow delay
14 23 AVERAGEComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
108
Comprehensive Traffic Management 
Plan
329
Figure 103  Average Car Speed (Morning  Peak)Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
109
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
330Figure 104.  Average Car Speed (Evening  Peak)
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
110
Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanPedestrian  Counts
Pedestrian  Count  Survey  was carried  out to estimate  the quantum  of pedestrian  movements  across  important  locations  with  predominant  
pedestrian  activity  at major  junctions  for which  the turning  volume  counts  were  done  in the study  area. This  in turn  would  help  in assessing  
the need  for various  facilities  such  as pedestrian  subway,  foot over  bridge,  Zebra  crossings  etc. on priority  basis  in the short  and medium  time  
frame  for safe pedestrian  movement . 
Pedestrians  crossings  at 8 major  junctions  along  Old Madras  Road  Corridor  were  recorded  for a period  of 6 hours  from  9.00 AM to 12.00 PM 
and 5.30 PM to 8.30 PM. Summary  of pedestrian  counts  with  peak  hour  pedestrian  characteristics  are shown  below . Figure  105 and Table  
132.
Figure 105 Pedestrian Count Survey Locations 331
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
111
Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanSl. 
No.Junction 
NameCrossing The RoadAlong The 
Road/Footpath
TOTALMorn 
Peak 
Hour 
Vol.Morn Peak 
Hour TimeEvn. 
Peak 
Hour 
Vol.Evn. Peak Hour 
TimeDir 1 Dir 2 LHS RHS
1Mahatma 
Gandhi Park 
Junction3299 3676 5440 8952 21367 3474 10.00 - 11.00 4346 19.30 - 20.30
2Anil Kumble 
Circle2130 2475 2724 2408 9737 1919 10.00 - 11.00 1451 19.30 - 20.30
3MG Road -
Dickenson 
Road 
Junction3180 3199 7012 8453 21844 3687 10.00 - 11.00 3651 18.30 - 19.30
4 Trinity Circle 3855 4036 13146 3952 24989 4211 10.00 - 11.00 4208 19.30 - 20.30
5Halasuru 
Junction4814 5172 9480 5201 24667 4195 9.00 - 10.00 4114 18.30 - 19.30
6SV Road -
Murphy Road 
Junction813 1119 8007 0 9939 1674 10.00 - 11.00 1690 18.30 - 19.30
7Binnamangal
a Junction1833 2454 4851 4568 13706 2274 11.00 - 12.00 2333 18.30 - 19.30
8Varthur Road 
Junction3347 3239 9800 2190 18576 3128 10.00 - 11.00 3098 17.30 - 18.30
Observations
•Pedestrian  crossings  at junctions  along  the study  
corridor  ranged  from  24989  to 9737  for 6 hours  
duration . 
•Among  all the locations  in the study  area,  heavy  
pedestrian  crossing  was observed  at Trinity  Circle  
(24989 ) followed  by Halasuru  Junction  (24667 ). 
•Maximum  pedestrian  crossings  were  observed  
between  10.00 AM and 11.00 AM in the morning  
and between  18.30 PM and 19.30 PM in the evening  
at majority  of locations .Table  32 Summary  of Pedestrian  Volume  Counts
Figure 106. Peak Hour Pedestrian Count Details 332Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
112
Road  Inventory  Details  
The roadway inventory details in terms of lane widths are shown in the table below in Table 33:
Link No Name of Road Name of Starting Point Name of Ending PointCarriageway Width in meters
LHS Width Median RHS Width
1 Old Madras Road Queens Circle Anil Kumble Circle 10.5 1 14.5
2Old Madras Road
Anil Kumble Circle Brigade Road junction 8 0.5 10.5
3Old Madras Road
Brigade Road junctionDicken Son road 
intersection8.25 2.5 8.25
4Old Madras RoadDicken Son road 
intersectionTrinity Circle 8.25 2.5 8.25
5Old Madras Road
Trinity CircleChinmaya Mission 
Hospital JunctionTotal Carriageway Width is varying from 15 meters to 23 
meters with central metro median.
6Old Madras Road Chinmaya Mission 
Hospital Junction
Murphy Road Junction 12  meters undivided 
7Old Madras Road
Murphy Road JunctionIndiranagar Double 
road9 0.5 8.5
8Old Madras RoadIndiranagar Double 
roadSuranjanDas road 
intersection10.5 1 10.5
9Old Madras Road
SuranjanDas road 
intersectionBennigenahalli 11.5 1 11.5
10Old Madras Road
Bennigenahalli K.R.PuramTotal Carriageway Width is varying from 24 meters to 46 
meters with central metro median.
344Table 33 Road Inventory DetailsComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
113
Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanRoad  Inventory  Details  
Figure 107 Road Inventory Survey Details 345
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
82
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
114
Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanRoad  Inventory  Details  
Figure 108  Road Inventory Survey Details 347
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
115
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
Figure 109. Road Inventory Survey Details 348
Road  Inventory  Details  
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
116
Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanThe bridge  was built  with  the intention  to ease  traffic  between  Baiyappanahalli  
and K R Puram . The bridge  is now  a bottleneck  for commuters  travelling  to 
Whitefield  and nearby  areas . Lack  of a link to the adjoining  areas  of Whitefield  
and Mahadevpura,  is creating  more  congestion . This  congestion  problem  
doubles  up, as a parking  lot for the nearby  KR Puram  railway  station  is located  
below  the bridge  and in the absence  of safe pedestrian  crossing,  the things  are 
getting  out of control . To make  matters  worse,  BMTC,  KSRTC  and some  private  
buses  stop  at the entrance  of the up ramp  of the hanging  bridge  and below  the 
K.R.Puram  Bridge .
The traffic  gridlock  under  the bridge  near  the K R Puram  railway  station  has 
gained  a notorious  reputation . The three -lane Old Madras  Road  narrows  to a 
traffic  gridlock  during  peak  hours  on a 500-metre  stretch  between  Tin Factory  
and K R Puram  railway  station,  causing  traffic  pile-ups that stretch  for over   
kilometers  and sometimes  even  more  especially  during  festive  seasons . The 
problem  is exacerbated  during  peak  hours .  
This  is a combined  junction  where  two major  arterial  corridors  ( White  Field  to 
Hebbal  Ring  road  and Baiyappanahalli  to Hoskote)  cross  each  other  with  a small  
transition  length  as shown  in the Figure . These  is one of the major  and important  
gateway  junctions  for the traffic  coming  from  Chennai  and Whitefield  area  
There  are major  issues  observed  at K.R. Puram  Bridge  which  are explained  in 
detail  in the following  sectionsa) Bus stoppage  at the up ramp  of the bridge
The most  critical  and worst  situation  to start  with  that results  in 
traffic  congestion  at this area  is the stoppage  of interstate  buses,  
especially  the private  bus operators  who  stop  their  buses  at the 
entrance  of the bridge,  which  results  in server  traffic  jams .  The 
congestion  is occurring  due to the crisscrossing  or merging  and 
diverging  of vehicles,  which  takes  place  at this location  as shown  in 
the Figure  111.2. Traffic  Congestion  at K.R. Puram  Hanging  Bridge
Figure  110. Plan of K.R. Puram Hanging Bridge 
 352Figure  111 Plan of K.R. Puram Hanging Bridge ISSUE IDENTIFICATION AND  CONCEPTUAL  AT GRADE SOLUTIONSComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
117
9 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
67It is observed  that the carriageway  width  reduces  drastically  from  15 
meters  to 5 meters  and further  to less than  5 meters  at a particular  stretch    
near  Halasuru  Metro  station . Another  issue  is the bus stop,  which  is 
located  at the point  where  the road  width  gets reduced . Even  though  
there  is a bus bay at the location,  the buses  do not stop  at the bus bay 
resulting  in serious  traffic  jams  during  the peak  hours . Figure  112.✓ Road  widening  needs  to be carried  out on the RHS  side to clear  the 
traffic  congestion . Land  should  be acquired  for a length  of 50 meters  
in length  and 6 meters  in width  as shown  in the Figure  113.
✓ Bus stop needs  to be shifted  and enforcement  need  to be done  
so that the buses  stop only  at the bus bay. Figure  114
Figure 112.  Identification of issuesNarrow Carriageway width near Halasuru Metro Station causing Congestion
a. Recommendations
Figure 113 Solutions For the Identified  Issues
Figure 114.  Solutions For the Identified  Issues
351Benefits:
➢Once  the land  is acquired  and road  is widened,  traffic  
congestions  will be reduced .Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
118
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
Figure 115.Issue along the corridor
361Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
KEY MAP OF ALL ISSUES ALONG THE CORRIDOR
119
•The comparison  between  existing  operational  scenario  and the operational  scenario  after  implementing  the interventions  discussed  in the previous  chapter  along  
Tumkur  Road  Corridor  is tabulated  in Table 24.  From  Table  24 it can be seen  that with  the implementation  of the interventions,  there  will be considerable  reduction  
in Volume  to Capacity  Ratio  (V/C  Ratio),  enhanced  Level  of Service  and increased  Journey  Speeds  along  Tumkur  Road  Corridor . 
With  all the above  introversions,  the speeds  on the corridor  can be improvised  and the average  vehicular  speeds  can be increased  form  15kmph  to 25 kmph  
between  Yeshwanthpur   Skywalk  and Goraguntae  Palya  and  Yeshwanthapur  to SRS junction  and from  SRS junction  to NICE   interchange  the speeds  can be 
improvised  up to 40 kmph . (Figure  101).
A summary  of the existing   travel  parameters   versus  the improved  parameters  after  the recommended  interventions  is given  in comparison  statement  Table  34 & 
35.
Table 34. Comparison Statement 
Towards 
YeshwanthpurTowards 
NagasandraTowards 
YeshwanthpurTowards 
NagasandraTowards 
YeshwanthpurTowards 
NagasandraTowards 
YeshwanthpurTowards 
Nagasandra
2700 2700 1.26 1.22 LOS F LOS F 15 15
5600 2800 0.65 1.59 LOS C LOS F 30 15
6800 6800 0.79 0.81 LOS D LOS D 25 25
6800 6800 0.55 0.38 LOS C LOS B 30 40
6800 6800 0.65 0.33 LOS C LOS B 30 40
6800 6800 0.43 0.31 LOS B LOS B 40 40WITH IMPROVEMENTS
Capacity V/C Ratio-Morning PeakLevel of Service-Morning 
PeakAnticipated Speed (Kmph) as per 
HCM-Morning Peak
18
Towards 
YeshwanthpurTowards 
NagasandraTowards 
YeshwanthpurTowards 
NagasandraTowards 
YeshwanthpurTowards 
NagasandraTowards 
YeshwanthpurTowards 
NagasandraTowards 
YeshwanthpurTowards 
NagasandraTowards 
YeshwanthpurTowards 
Nagasandra
1Between Yeshwanthpur TTMC 
and Yeshwanthpur Skywalk2700 2700 3407 3285 1.26 1.22 LOS F LOS F 15 13 17 22
2Yeshwanthpur Skywalk and 
Gorguntepalya3360 2800 3668 4461 1.09 1.59 LOS F LOS F 15 17 17 22
3Between Gorguntepalya and 
SRS Junction4080 4080 5362 5496 1.31 1.35 LOS F LOS F 21 16 23 21
4Between SRS and Jalahalli 
Juction4080 4080 3728 2601 0.91 0.64 LOS E LOS C 17 25 36 35
5Between Jalahalli Juction and 
Hesarghatta Junction4080 4080 4451 2214 1.09 0.54 LOS F LOS C 19 25 27 22
6Between Hesarghatta Junction 
and Nagasandra6800 6800 2938 2097 0.43 0.31 LOS B LOS B 16 24 43 46EXISTING 
Road Name Sl. No.Car Journey Speed (Kmph)-
Morning PeakCapacity Morning Peak Hour Volume (PCUs) V/C Ratio-Morning Peak Level of Service-Morning PeakBus Journey Speed (Kmph)-
Morning Peak Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
120
Table 35. Comparison Statement 
Towards 
YeshwanthpurTowards 
NagasandraTowards 
YeshwanthpurTowards 
NagasandraTowards 
YeshwanthpurTowards 
NagasandraTowards 
YeshwanthpurTowards 
NagasandraTowards 
YeshwanthpurTowards 
NagasandraTowards 
YeshwanthpurTowards 
Nagasandra
1Between Yeshwanthpur TTMC 
and Yeshwanthpur Skywalk2700 2700 3808 3362 1.41 1.25 LOS F LOS F 14 15 19 17
2Yeshwanthpur Skywalk and 
Gorguntepalya3360 2800 3725 4163 1.11 1.49 LOS F LOS F 14 15 19 17
3Between Gorguntepalya and 
SRS Junction4080 4080 5219 6071 1.28 1.49 LOS F LOS F 20 9 18 23
4Between SRS and Jalahalli 
Juction4080 4080 3897 2502 0.96 0.61 LOS E LOS C 24 15 35 32
5Between Jalahalli Juction and 
Hesarghatta Junction4080 4080 4843 2847 1.19 0.70 LOS F LOS C 16 12 26 22
6Between Hesarghatta Junction 
and Nagasandra6800 6800 3752 2713 0.55 0.40 LOS C LOS B 20 23 44 46Sl. No. Road Name EXISTING 
Capacity Evening Peak Hour Volume (PCUs) V/C Ratio-Evening Peak Level of Service-Evening PeakBus Journey Speed (Kmph)-
Evening Peak Car Journey Speed (Kmph)-
Evening Peak
Towards 
YeshwanthpurTowards 
NagasandraTowards 
YeshwanthpurTowards 
NagasandraTowards 
YeshwanthpurTowards 
NagasandraTowards 
YeshwanthpurTowards 
Nagasandra
2700 2700 1.41 1.25 LOS F LOS F 15 15
5600 2800 0.67 1.49 LOS C LOS F 30 15
6800 6800 0.77 0.89 LOS D LOS D 25 25
6800 6800 0.57 0.37 LOS C LOS B 30 40
6800 6800 0.71 0.42 LOS C LOS B 30 40
6800 6800 0.55 0.40 LOS C LOS B 30 40WITH IMPROVEMENTS
Capacity V/C Ratio-Evening Peak Level of Service-Evening PeakAnticipated Speed (Kmph) as per 
HCM-Evening PeakComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
121
Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanThe comparison  between  existing  operational  scenario  and the operational  scenario  after  implementing  the interventions  discussed  in the previous  chapter  along  Old Madras  Road  
Corridor  is tabulated  in Table  143.  From  Table  36 it can be seen  that with  the implementation  of the interventions,  there  will be considerable  reduction  in Volume  to Capacity  Ratio  
(V/C  Ratio)  Old Madras  Road  Corridor . 
A summary of the existing travel parameters versus the improved parameters after the recommended interventions is given in co mpa rison statement Table 36.
371Table  36. Total  Summary  of the existing  and proposed   Scenario  with  all the proposed  interventions  with  Morning  Peak
Towards K.R 
Puram
Towards 
M.G Road
Towards K.R 
Puram
Towards 
M.G Road
Towards K.R 
Puram
Towards 
M.G Road
Towards K.R 
Puram
Towards 
M.G Road
Towards K.R 
Puram
Towards 
M.G Road
Towards K.R 
Puram
Towards 
M.G Road
1 6 LaneBetween Mahatma 
Gandhi Park Junction 
and Anil Kumble Circle4200 4200 1998 4273 0.48 1.02 LOS C LOS F 14 13 15 15
2 4 LaneBetween Anil Kumble 
Circle and Kamraj Road 
Junction1755 1755 3446 5686 1.96 3.24 LOS F LOS F 11 12 13 13
3 6 LaneBetween Kamraj Road 
Junction and Dikenson 
Road Junction4200 4200 2118 3662 0.5 0.87 LOS C LOS E 11 12 13 13
4 6 LaneBetween Dikenson Road 
Junction and Trinity Circle4200 4200 4313 3897 1.03 0.93 LOS F LOS E 11 9 16 16
5 4 LaneBetween Trinity Circle and 
Halasuru Junction2700 2700 3145 3769 1.16 1.4 LOS F LOS F 18 18 16 16
6 2 LaneBetween Halasuru 
Junction and CMH Road 
Junction2160 2160 2410 2114 1.12 0.98 LOS F LOS E 18 10 16 16
7 4 LaneBetween CMH Road 
Junction and Murphy 
Road Junction2700 2700 1281 1238 0.47 0.46 LOS C LOS C 18 10 14 15
8 4 LaneBetween Murphy Road 
Junction and Indiranagar 
Double Road Junction1620 1620 3177 2535 1.96 1.57 LOS F LOS F 15 15 14 15
9 4 LaneBetween Indiranagar 
Double Road Junction 
and Binnamangala 
Junction 2700 2700 3242 4599 1.2 1.7 LOS F LOS F 13 15 15 16
10 6 LaneBetween Binnamangala 
Junction and 
Suranjandas Road 
Junction4200 4200 3318 3645 0.79 0.87  LOS D LOS E 13 13 15 16
11 6 LaneBetween Suranjandas 
Road Junction and 
Varthur Road Junction4200 4200 3726 3529 0.89 0.84 LOS E  LOS D 12 13 17 16
12 6 LaneBetween Varthur Road 
Junction and Tin Factory2520 4200 4836 7565 1.92 1.8 LOS F LOS F 12 12 15 14Sl. No.
Typology of RoadRoad Name EXISTING 
CapacityMorning Peak 
Hour Volume 
(PCUs)V/C Ratio-
Morning PeakLevel of Service-
Morning PeakBus Journey 
Speed (Kmph)-
Morning Peak Car Journey 
Speed (Kmph)-
Morning PeakComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
122
Comprehensive Traffic Management 
Plan
372
Towards K.R 
Puram
Towards 
M.G Road
Towards K.R 
Puram
Towards 
M.G Road
Towards K.R 
Puram
Towards 
M.G Road
Towards K.R 
Puram
Towards 
M.G Road
1 6 LaneBetween Mahatma 
Gandhi Park Junction 
and Anil Kumble Circle4200 4200 0.4757 1.0174 LOS C LOS F 30 15
2 4 LaneBetween Anil Kumble 
Circle and Kamraj Road 
Junction2700 2700 1.2763 2.1059 LOS F LOS F 15 15
3 6 LaneBetween Kamraj Road 
Junction and Dikenson 
Road Junction4200 4200 0.5043 0.8719 LOS C LOS E 30 25
4 6 LaneBetween Dikenson Road 
Junction and Trinity Circle4200 4200 1.0269 0.9279 LOS F LOS E 15 25
5 4 LaneBetween Trinity Circle and 
Halasuru Junction2700 2700 1.1648 1.3959 LOS F LOS F 15 15
6 2 LaneBetween Halasuru 
Junction and CMH Road 
Junction2400 2400 1.0042 0.8808 LOS F LOS E 15 25
7 4 LaneBetween CMH Road 
Junction and Murphy 
Road Junction2700 2700 0.4744 0.4585 LOS C LOS C 30 30
8 4 LaneBetween Murphy Road 
Junction and Indiranagar 
Double Road Junction2700 2700 1.1767 0.9389 LOS F LOS E 15 25
9 4 LaneBetween Indiranagar 
Double Road Junction 
and Binnamangala 
Junction 2700 2700 1.2007 1.7033 LOS F LOS F 15 15
10 6 LaneBetween Binnamangala 
Junction and 
Suranjandas Road 
Junction4200 4200 0.79 0.8679  LOS D LOS E 25 25
11 6 LaneBetween Suranjandas 
Road Junction and 
Varthur Road Junction4200 4200 0.8871 0.8402 LOS E  LOS D 25 25
12 6 LaneBetween Varthur Road 
Junction and Tin Factory4200 4200 1.1514 1.8012 LOS F LOS F 15 15WITH IMPROVEMENTS
CapacityV/C Ratio-
Morning PeakLevel of Service-
Morning PeakAnticipated 
Speed (Kmph) 
as per HCM-
Morning PeakSl. No.
Typology of RoadRoad Name Table  37. Total  Summary  of the existing  and proposed   Scenario  with  all the proposed  interventions  with  Morning  Peak  Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
123
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
373
Towards K.R 
Puram
Towards 
M.G Road
Towards K.R 
Puram
Towards 
M.G Road
Towards K.R 
Puram
Towards 
M.G Road
Towards K.R 
Puram
Towards 
M.G Road
Towards K.R 
Puram
Towards 
M.G Road
Towards K.R 
Puram
Towards 
M.G Road
1 6 LaneBetween Mahatma 
Gandhi Park Junction 
and Anil Kumble Circle4200 4200 1979 4207 0.47 1 LOS C LOS F 12 15 15 15
2 4 LaneBetween Anil Kumble 
Circle and Kamraj Road 
Junction1755 1755 3497 6193 1.99 3.53 LOS F LOS F 12 13 15 15
3 6 LaneBetween Kamraj Road 
Junction and Dikenson 
Road Junction4200 4200 2118 3662 0.5 0.87 LOS C LOS E 10 13 13 15
4 6 LaneBetween Dikenson 
Road Junction and 
Trinity Circle4200 4200 4355 3744 1.04 0.89 LOS F LOS E 10 16 16 17
5 4 LaneBetween Trinity Circle 
and Halasuru Junction2700 2700 3263 3888 1.21 1.44 LOS F LOS F 10 15 16 17
6 2 LaneBetween Halasuru 
Junction and CMH 
Road Junction2160 2160 2453 2126 1.14 0.98 LOS F LOS E 18 5 16 17
7 4 LaneBetween CMH Road 
Junction and Murphy 
Road Junction2700 2700 1226 1226 0.45 0.45 LOS C LOS C 18 5 14 15
8 4 LaneBetween Murphy Road 
Junction and 
Indiranagar Double 
Road Junction1620 1620 3086 2478 1.91 1.53 LOS F LOS F 14 15 14 15
9 4 LaneBetween Indiranagar 
Double Road Junction 
and Binnamangala 
Junction 2700 2700 3187 4305 1.18 1.59 LOS F LOS F 14 15 14 15
10 6 LaneBetween 
Binnamangala Junction 
and Suranjandas Road 
Junction4200 4200 3216 3398 0.77 0.81  LOS D  LOS D 8 13 15 15
11 6 LaneBetween Suranjandas 
Road Junction and 
Varthur Road Junction4200 4200 3803 3563 0.91 0.85 LOS E  LOS D 14 8 17 14
12 6 LaneBetween Varthur Road 
Junction and Tin 
Factory2520 4200 4153 7733 1.65 1.84 LOS F LOS F 12 7 15 15Car Journey 
Speed 
(Kmph)-
Evening 
Peak Sl. No.
Typology of RoadRoad Name EXISTING 
CapacityEvening 
Peak Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C Ratio-
Evening 
PeakLevel of 
Service-
Evening PeakBus Journey 
Speed 
(Kmph)-
Evening 
Peak Table  38. Total  Summary  of the existing  and proposed   Scenario  with  all the proposed  interventions  with  Evening  Peak  Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
124
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
374
Towards K.R 
Puram
Towards 
M.G Road
Towards K.R 
Puram
Towards 
M.G Road
Towards K.R 
Puram
Towards 
M.G Road
Towards K.R 
Puram
Towards 
M.G Road
1 6 LaneBetween Mahatma 
Gandhi Park Junction 
and Anil Kumble Circle4200 4200 0.47 1.00 LOS C LOS F 30 15
2 4 LaneBetween Anil Kumble 
Circle and Kamraj Road 
Junction2700 2700 1.30 2.29 LOS F LOS F 15 15
3 6 LaneBetween Kamraj Road 
Junction and Dikenson 
Road Junction4200 4200 0.50 0.87 LOS C LOS E 30 25
4 6 LaneBetween Dikenson 
Road Junction and 
Trinity Circle4200 4200 1.04 0.89 LOS F LOS E 15 25
5 4 LaneBetween Trinity Circle 
and Halasuru Junction2700 2700 1.21 1.44 LOS F LOS F 15 15
6 2 LaneBetween Halasuru 
Junction and CMH 
Road Junction2400 2400 1.02 0.89 LOS F LOS E 15 25
7 4 LaneBetween CMH Road 
Junction and Murphy 
Road Junction2700 2700 0.45 0.45 LOS C LOS C 30 30
8 4 LaneBetween Murphy Road 
Junction and 
Indiranagar Double 
Road Junction2700 2700 1.14 0.92 LOS F LOS E 15 25
9 4 LaneBetween Indiranagar 
Double Road Junction 
and Binnamangala 
Junction 2700 2700 1.18 1.59 LOS F LOS F 15 15
10 6 LaneBetween 
Binnamangala Junction 
and Suranjandas Road 
Junction4200 4200 0.77 0.81  LOS D  LOS D 25 25
11 6 LaneBetween Suranjandas 
Road Junction and 
Varthur Road Junction4200 4200 0.91 0.85 LOS E  LOS D 25 25
12 6 LaneBetween Varthur Road 
Junction and Tin 
Factory4200 4200 0.99 1.84 LOS E LOS F 25 15Capacity V/C Ratio-Evening PeakLevel of Service-
Evening  PeakAnticipated Speed 
(Kmph) as per HCM-
Evening Peak
Sl. No.
Typology of RoadRoad Name WITH IMPROVEMENTSTable  39 . Total  Summary  of the existing  and proposed   Scenario  with  all the proposed  interventions  with  Evening  Peak  Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
125
MEI Junction
CORRIDOR
 1
Tumakuru 
road - MEI 
Junction
 
Proposed Split 
Flyover at MEI 
Intersection along 
Tumakuru road
Proposed Split Flyover at MEI Junction on Tumakuru road
Given  the significant  traffic  congestion  at the MEI Junction,  particularly  with  high  volumes  of traffic  moving  between  Tumakuru  and 
Bengaluru,  immediate  attention  is required . To alleviate  this congestion,  a Split  flyover  is  having  been  proposed  to facilitate  smoother  flow  
for through  traffic ."Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – MEI Junction
Figure 116. Proposed split flyover at MEI junction – Tumakuru road
127
TumakuruBangalore
MEI 
Junction
MEI RoadMysore Sandal road 
flyover end point
Proposed Split Flyover at MEI intersection
MEI RoadUp RampUp Ramp
Down RampDown RampMEI 
Junction
TumakuruBangaloreProposed Split Flyover
Figure 117. Proposed Split flyover at MEI junction on Tumakuru roadDue to the heavy  traffic  congestion  at the MEI Junction,  especially  with  substantial  traffic  volumes  moving  between  Tumakuru  and 
Bengaluru,  immediate  intervention  is essential . To reduce  this congestion,  a plan  for a split  flyover  on either  sides  of the METRO  has been  
proposed  to streamline  through  traffic . A two-lane single  side split  flyover  is suggested  on the Tumakuru  road  as shown  in the figure . This  
configuration  accounts  for spatial  limitations  caused  by the presence  of Metro  pillars  in the middle .Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – MEI Junction
128
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – MEI Junction
Figure  118. Site photos at MEI junction on Tumakuru roadProposed Split flyover at MEI junction on Tumakuru road
129

Figure 119. Proposed cross section for 46lane Vehicle underpass at Madiwala Proposed Typical  Cross section for four lane split flyover at MEI junction on Tumakuru roadComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – MEI Junction
130

Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – Double Decker Integration
Details of the integrated plan on Tumakuru road at Peenya metro station with existing NH elevated 
corridor and the proposed Double Decker.
At this location,  a slightly  
complex  down  ramp  is proposed,  
which  needs  to integrate  with  the 
existing  NH flyover  on the left 
hand  side towards  Tumakuru  
from  Nayandahalli  side.At this location,  a Up ramp  is proposed  to merge  with  the existing  NH flyover  
on the left-hand  side towards  Hebbal  on the double  decker .
Tumakuru
YeshwanthapuraProposed Double 
decker with Metro
Merging pointDiverging  point
Figure  120. Proposed  
Elevated  corridor  section  
wise  details
131
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – – Double Decker Integration
Details of the Proposed integrated plan of Double decker and NH on Tumkur  road at 100Ft 
Goraguntaepalya Junction 
Merging Down Ramp from double decker to 
existing NH FlyoverDiverging Up Ramp  from existing NH 
flyover towards Hebbal.
This  plan  features  both  an "up ramp"  and a "down  ramp"  for the existing  NH elevated  corridor,  which  is part of the proposed  
Double  Decker  project . These  ramps  will provide  direct  traffic  access  from  Nayandahalli  to the Tumakuru  side,  as well  as from  
Tumakuru  to Hebbal  and onward  to the airport .Figure 121. Proposed integration plan of Double decker with existing NH elevated road
132Towards Hebbal
Towards 
Nayandahalli
Towards YeshwanthpurTowards Tumakuru
Outer Ring RoadARMY LAND 
K.R.PuramYeshwanthapuraCORRIDOR
02
Tumakuru 
road – Old 
Madras 
road
 
Mathikere  Cross -
IISC -Mekri  circle -
Jayamahal -St John 
Church road -Ulsoor 
lake-Old Madras 
Road -KR Puram
Yeshwanthpura
IISCMekri  Circle
Cantonment 
Halasur LakeCorridor 1 Section B: Yeshwanthapura to Halasuru  lake Old Madras road 
Continuing  from  Section  A, the elevated  corridor  begins  after  the Yeshwanthpur  flyover,  passes  in front  of IISc,  and turns  left towards  
Mekhri  Circle  via C.V. Raman  Road . It then  follows  Jayamahal  Road,  reaching  the Cantonment  Railway  Station,  where  it turns  left onto  
Millers  Road . The corridor  continues  along  St. John’s  Road,  passing  Halasuru  Lake,  and connects  to Old Madras  Road  near  Indiranagar . 
This  stretch  provides  seamless  travel  from  Yeshwanthpur  to Old Madras  Road,  bypassing  twelve  minor  and major  junctions,  offering  
significant  relief  to commuters . It then  extends  to K.R. Puram,  which  is detailed  in Section  C of the corridor ."Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
Figure 122 Proposed Elevated corridor from Yeshwanthapura to Halasur lake on Old Madras roadK.R.Puram
134Mathikere  
cross
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
Proposed Elevated corridor from Yeshwanthapura junction to Old Madras road - Alignment details
At this location,  the 
elevated  corridor  passes  
in front  of IISC
At this location  , the 
proposed  corridor  takes  
left at C.N.Rao junction
At this location,  the 
proposed  elevated  
corridor  starts  and ends  
.
Mekri  Circle
YeshwanthapuraMathikere  crossC N Rao CircleIISC
Figure 123. Proposed Elevated corridor from Yeshwanthapura to Halasur lake on Old Madras road Site inspection photos 135
Proposed Elevated corridor from Yeshwanthapura junction to Old Madras roadComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
Figure 124. Proposed Elevated corridor from Yeshwanthapura to Halasur lake on Old Madras road Site inspection photosProposed  elevated  
corridor  passes  over  the 
Mekri  Circle
Proposed  elevated  
corridor  passes  over  the 
Mekri  Circle
Proposed  elevated  
corridor  passes  through  
CV Raman  road
C V Raman road
Cantonment 
Railway 
station
IISC
136
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
Proposed Elevated corridor from Yeshwanthapura junction to Old Madras road
A proposed  elevated  corridor  
runs  along  Jayamahal  Road,  
turning  right  just before  the 
Cantonment  Railway  Station  
underpass .
A proposed  elevated  corridor  
runs  along  Jayamahal  Road, .
A proposed  elevated  corridor  
runs  along  Jayamahal  Road,  
crosses  the CL junction ..
Jaya mahal Road
CL JunctionCantonment Jaya Mahal road
Mekri  CircleUlsoor Lake 
Figure 125. Proposed Elevated corridor from Yeshwanthapura to Halasur lake on Old Madras road Site inspection photos137
Proposed Elevated corridor from Yeshwanthapura junction to Old Madras road Site Reconnaissance Photos
Millers road ROBComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
Figure 126. Proposed Elevated corridor from Yeshwanthapura to Halasur lake on Old Madras road Site inspection photos
A proposed  elevated  corridor  
runs  along  the Millers  road  
and crosses  over  the RoB.A proposed  elevated  corridor   
crosses  the AKS  junction  and 
a down  ramp  is proposed  at 
Coles  park .A proposed  elevated  corridor  
along  Old Madras  after  
taking  the left from  Ulsoor  
lake.K.R.Puram
Contonment
Coles Park – ST John’s 
Church Road
Halasuru 
Road
138
Proposed Elevated corridor from Yeshwanthapura junction to Old Madras road Site Reconnaissance PhotosComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
Figure 127 Proposed Elevated corridor from Yeshwanthapura to Halasur lake on Old Madras road Site inspection photos
Indiranagar 
RTO
Swami Vivekananda 
Metro StationAn elevated  rotary  is 
proposed  at the Swami  
Vivekananda  Metro  Station,  
where  another  elevated  
corridor  from  Silk Board  
intersects
An elevated  rotary  is 
proposed  at the Swami  
Vivekananda  Metro  Station,  
where  another  elevated  
corridor  from  Silk Board  
intersects
Murphy road 
Junction
Proposed  elevated  corridor  
turns  left to reach  old Madras  
road .
139
Proposed Elevated corridor from Yeshwanthapura junction to Old Madras roadComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
Figure 128. Proposed Elevated corridor from Yeshwanthapura to Halasur lake on Old Madras road Site inspection photos
K.R.Puram  ROB - 
Gopalan Mall
K.R.Puram  
Interchange
K.R.Puram  
Interchange
Proposed  elevated  
corridor  moves  along  the 
Old Madras  road
Proposed  elevated  
corridor  moves  along  the 
Old Madras  road  and 
terminates  at K.R.Puram  
where  three  elevated  
corridors  meet  at the 
interchange . 
140
K.R.Puram Baiyyappanahalli
BenniganahalliSuranjandas  road
100ft roadCorridor 1 Section C: Ulsoor lake Old Madras road to K.R.Puram   ( Extension road considered till Anil Kumble Circle 
via M.G Road)
Continuing  from  Section  B, the elevated  corridor  starts  at the Halasuru  Lake  Junction  on Old Madras  Road  and extends  to the K.R. Puram  
interchange . This  stretch  bypasses  seven  critical  minor  and major  junctions  that experience  significant  congestion . Additionally,  this section  
intersects  with  another  elevated  corridor,  which  begins  at Silk Board  and connects  to Old Madras  Road  near  Swami  Vivekananda  Metro  
Station  on 80 Feet Road . An elevated  rotary  is proposed  at this intersection  to efficiently  manage  traffic  flow .Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
Figure 129. Proposed Elevated corridor from Halasur lake on Old Madras road to K. R. Puram  - Alignment Details section C141
Proposed 
Elevated RotaryK.R.Pura
m
Halsuru
DomlurProposed Elevated  Rotary at the intersecting point of two Elevated corridors near Swami Vivekananda Metro Station 
A three -arm elevated  rotary  is a circular  traffic  interchange  located  at an elevated  level,  typically  above  ground,  designed  to manage  traffic  
from  three  connecting  roads  or highways . It functions  similarly  to a roundabout  but is elevated,  often  built  above  an existing  road  network  
to manage  traffic  flow  efficiently .
Here’s  how  it works :
1.Three  Arms : This  rotary  connects  three  different  roads  or routes  that converge  at one point . The traffic  from  each  arm enters  the circular  
rotary  and can exit onto  any of the other  two connecting  roads,  ensuring  continuous  movement  without  the need  for traditional  
intersections  or stoplights .
2.Elevated  Structure : The rotary  is constructed  above  ground,  allowing  it to handle  traffic  flows  from  multiple  directions  while  avoiding  
the interference  of ground -level  traffic . It is especially  useful  in busy  urban  areas  or where  there  are multiple  crossing  points .Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
Figure 130. Proposed Elevated  Rotary at the intersecting point of two Elevated corridors near Swami Vivekananda Metro Station 142
Proposed Elevated  Rotary at the intersecting point of two Elevated corridors near Swami Vivekananda Metro Station 
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
Figure 131. Site Photos of the  Proposed Elevated  Rotary at the intersecting point of two Elevated corridors near Swami Vivekananda Metro Station 
143
Proposed Elevated Rotary & Loop System  at K.R.Puram Interchange
Yeshwanthpura  to K.R.Puram  
Elevated CorridorElevated corridor from Silkboard  to 
HebbalElevated corridor from Silkboard  to 
HebbalK.R. Puram  interchange  is a crucial  junction  where  multiple  major  roads  converge,  including  the Outer  Ring  Road  from  Hebbal,  the 
Hoskote  National  Highway,  the Outer  Ring  Road  from  Silk Board,  and Old Madras  Road  from  Yeshwanthpur . Given  the complexity  of 
traffic  from  these  multiple  directions,  various  flyovers  and bridges  have  already  been  proposed . Additionally,  the integration  of the Metro  
rail system  further  complicates  the junction,  making  it one of the most  intricate  in Bangalore . As a result,  a comprehensive  solution  is 
required  to address  the traffic  challenges . Two  options  have  been  proposed  for this location :
1.A Loop  System  
2.An Elevated  RotaryComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
Figure 132. Site Proposed Elevated Rotary & Loop System  at K.R.Puram  Interchange 144
Proposed Elevated Rotary at K.R.Puram Interchange
To integrate  the three  elevated  corridors  converging  at this point  from  Hebbal,  Silk 
Board,  and Yeshwanthpur,  a second -level  elevated  rotary  is proposed,  with  the 
Metro  operating  at level  one. This  rotary  will also be connected  to the existing  
flyover,  enabling  seamless  traffic  flow  from  all directions,  as illustrated  in the figure  
below
Proposed Elevated RotaryHebbal
HebbalYeshwanthapuraComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
Figure 133. Proposed Elevated Rotary at K.R.Puram  Interchange 145
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
Site photos of Proposed Elevated Rotary at K.R.Puram Interchange
Figure 134. Site Photos of the  Proposed Elevated  Rotary at K.R. Puram 
146
Proposed Elevated Loop system for integrating with all the elevated corridors
To integrate  the three  elevated  corridors  converging  at this point  from  Hebbal,  Silk Board,  and Yeshwanthpur,  a second -level  elevated  
rotary  is proposed,  with  the Metro  operating  at level  one. This  rotary  will also be connected  to the existing  flyover,  enabling  seamless  
traffic  flow  from  all directions,  as illustrated  in the figure  145 below
Hebbal
HebbalYeshwanthapuraProposed Elevated Loop SystemComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
Figure 135. Proposed Elevated Rotary at K.R.Puram  Interchange 147
Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
Figure 136. Proposed cross section for 4 lane  Elevated corridor from Yeshwanthapura to K.R.Puram   on Old Madras Road
Proposed Typical  Cross section for the 4 lane divided  Elevated corridor from Yeshwanthapura to K.R.Puram  on Old 
Madras road
148
Proposed Typical  Cross section for the 6 lane divided  Elevated corridor from Yeshwanthapura to K.R.Puram  on Old 
Madras roadComprehensive Traffic Management  Plan TUMKUR ROAD – OLD MADRAS ROAD
Figure 137. Proposed cross section for 6 lane  Elevated corridor from Yeshwanthapura to K.R.Puram   on Old Madras Road
149
Proposed  
Integrated  
Elevation  from  
Hudson  Circle  
to Minerva  
Circle  (Minerva  
Circle,  Bharat -
Talks,  Shivaji  
Talkies,  Town  
Hall,  LIC,  
Halasuru  Police  
Station,  Hudson  
Circle,  Cubbon  
Park)CORRIDOR 
03
J.C Road 
CORRIDOR  IV: JC ROAD  / LAL  BAGH  MAIN  ROAD  
(one  way  loop)
Starting  from  Hudson  Circle  to Lal Bagh  West  Gate ; Minerva  
Circle  to Hudson  Circle  via Town  Hall
Figure 138 JC Road CorridorThe fourth   corridor  to be undertaken  for the corridor  improvement  study  is the J.C Road/  
Lal Bagh  Road  Corridor  (Figure  196), which  starts  from  Hudson  Circle  near  BBMP  office  to 
Lal Bagh  West  Gate,  then  reaching  Town  Hall  and Hudson  Circle   back  via Minerva  circle . 
It is one of the busiest  corridors  in the center  of the city. It is the major  life line which  
connects  north  and south  parts  of the city.
Some  of the main  features  of the corridor  are:
•This  is a six-lane divided  road  with  varying  lanes  from  2 lanes  to 6 lanes . 
•Length  of the study  corridor  is 5.5 km and is a  sub Arterial  road .
•The road  surface  is varying  from  bituminous  to concrete .
•There  are thirteen  signalized  junctions  along  the corridor .
•Metro  Rail runs  on the edge  of the corridor  at Lal Bagh  West  Gate
The corridor  attracts  many  work  trips  due to the presence  of Government  
Office,  small -scale  industries,  wholesale  markets,  Hotels,Botanical  Park  
etc.(Figure  203) . 
The corridor  houses  many  major  attraction  points  such  as::•The biggest  car accessories  market  is located  on the corridor,  along  with  wholesale  
markets  for aluminium,  plastic,  mats ; net etc. along  J.C.Road . The vehicular  density  in 
terms  of trucks,  LCVs,  luggage  autos  is more  along  J.C road .
•One of the oldest  and biggest  botanical  gardens  of Karnataka  is located  along  the 
corridor .
• The corridor  also houses  heritage  and important  structures  like Town  hall,  Ravindra  
Kalakshetra,  BBMP  Office,  Shivaji  Statue,  Unity  Building,  LIC Building,  Canara  Bank  
etc. 
•Prominent  government  institutions  like Bruhat  Bangalore  Mahanagara  Palike - BBMP,  
Pass  Port Office,  and Government  College  of Pharmacy  etc. are on the corridor .
•The famous  cancer  hospital  – HCG  is located  on this corridor .
•The area  adjacent  to J.C Nagar  i.e. Sudama  Nagar  houses   various  small  scale  
industries  like garments,  manufacturing  units  of tools,  chairs  etc.
Figure  139. Attraction/  Generation  Entities/  Areas
Landmarks,  Attraction   & Production  CentersComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
151
CORRIDOR  IV: JC ROAD  / LAL  BAGH  MAIN  ROAD  
(one  way  loop)  Starting  from  Hudson  Circle  to Lal Bagh  
West  Gate ; Minerva  Circle  to Hudson  Circle  via Town  
Hall
Figure 140 JC Road CorridorThe fourth   corridor  to be undertaken  for the corridor  improvement  study  is the 
J.C Road/  Lal Bagh  Road  Corridor  (Figure  198), which  starts  from  Hudson  Circle  
near  BBMP  office  to Lal Bagh  West  Gate,  then  reaching  Town  Hall  and Hudson  
Circle  back  via Minerva  circle  as shown  below  in Figure  204It is one of the busiest  corridors  in the center  of the city. It is the major  life line 
which  connects  north  and south  parts  of the city.
Some  of the main  features  of the corridor  are:
•This  is a six-lane divided  road  with  varying  lanes  from  2 lanes  to 6 lanes . 
•Length  of the study  corridor  is 5.5 km and is a  sub Arterial  road .
•The road  surface  is varying  from  bituminous  to concrete .
•There  are thirteen  signalized  junctions  along  the corridor .
•Metro  Rail runs  on the edge  of the corridor  at Lal Bagh  West  Gate
The corridor  attracts  many  work  trips  due to the presence  of Government  
Office,  small -scale  industries,  wholesale  markets,  Hotels,Botanical  Park  
etc.(Figure  205-206) . 
The corridor  houses  many  major  attraction  points  such  as::
Landmarks,  Attraction   & Production  Centers
Figure 141 Landmarks, Attraction and Production CentresComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
152
The land  marks  mentioned  above  attract  huge  trips  0n both  weekdays  as well  as on weekends . The corridor  does  not have  metro  alignment  but one of the metro  stations  
is located  near  Lal Bagh  West  Gate . Figure 142. Attraction and Trip Generation
189Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
153
The entire  corridor  is a varying  from  3 Lane  to 6 lane one way  with  footpath  on 
either  side,  except  on a small  stretch  on J.C road  near  pass  port office,  where  the 
road  width  is narrow,  resulting  in peak  hour  traffic  congestion .  Besides,  on 
Devanga  Hostel  Road,  one stretch  of roadway  is reduced  to just two-lane 
(Figure  208)
It is observed  that on certain  stretches  of road,  footpath  condition  is good  but on 
majority  of the locations,  the condition  of the footpath  is poor . The pedestrian  facilities  
along  the corridor  are largely  neglected . There  is only  one pedestrian  skywalk  along  
entire  corridor . Footpaths  are encroached  upon  near  the Auto  Market  (Figure  209)
J.C. ROAD - CORRIDO
Figure 143. Bus Stops And Metro Station  Along The Corridor
Figure 144. Road Along The Corridor Figure 145 Existing Footpath Along The Corridor Corridor  CharacteristicsExisting  Footpaths/Pedestrian  Facilities
190There  are nine  bus stops  located  along  the corridor . There  is a dedicated  bus bay on 
Kalinga  Road  and for the remaining  bus stops  there  are no bus bays . The absence  of bus 
bays  results  in buses  stopping  on the carriageway  itself . All the Bus Stop  locations  are as 
shown  in the Figure  207.Major  Bus Stops  and Metro  Stations  along  the CorridorComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
154
There are seven major intersections where maximum merging and diverging 
of the traffic takes place. The major intersections are:
1.Hudson Circle - 4 arm Signalized intersection( Figure  211).
2.Subbaiah  Circe – 3 arm Signalized intersection.
3.Urvashi Circle – 4 arm Signalized intersection.
4.Lal Bagh Main Gate circle - 3 arm Signalized intersection. 
5.Lal Bagh West Gate circle - 5 arm Signalized intersection
6.Minerva Circle – 5 arm Signalized intersection.
7.Town Hall intersection -3 arm signalized intersection.Figure 146 Existing Footpath Along The Corridor 
Figure 147. Critical Junctions Along The Corridor Major  Junctions
191
Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
155
The corridor  lacks  right  signboards  at the right  locations ; the signboards  do not 
have  good  foundation  and most  of the signboards  are either  damaged  or not 
relevant  to the site. The signboards  are installed  on the shoulders  rather  than  on 
the footpath,  thus  neglecting  the safety  of the road  users .(Figure  212)
 
Road  safety  aspects  are also ignored  along  the corridor  to a larger  extent  
which  is of major  concern . Some  of the safety  issues  are:
•Pedestrian  crossings  are completely  neglected  along  Lal Bagh  Road  on the road  
stretch  from  Subbiah  Circle  until  the Lal Bagh  Main  Gate .
The roadway  is a one way  and there  are only  two intersections  in between,  and 
the speeds  are high . Due to high  vehicular  speed,  it has become  difficult  for the 
pedestrians  to cross  the roadway  and facilities  like skywalks  or high  raised  
pedestrian  crossings  are missing  along  the corridor . Similarly,  on the J.C Road,  
there  is no pedestrian  crossing  facility  available  at any mid blocks  thereby  
compromising  on the pedestrian  safety .
 
•None  of the bus stops  have  the Bus bays  designed  along  the corridor,  thus  the 
commuter  safety  is compromised .  Absence  of bus bays  is adding  up to buses  
stopping  on the carriageway  leading  to  congestion  during  the peak  hours . 
Road  surface  at certain  points  is very  bad resulting  in two-wheeler  skidding,  leading  to 
fatal  accidents,  especially  at Subbiah  Circle,  near  passport  office  and near  Urvashi  
Theater . Footpaths  are in very  bad condition,  which  need  to be rectified  on priority ; 
especially  on Devanga  Samaja  Road,  the granite  slabs  damaged . The electrical  cables  
from  the old electric  poles  are left open,  compromising  on  pedestrian  safety . (Figure  
150)
Road  markings  are missing  for the entire  corridor  stretch  .especially,  on J.C 
Road,  which  is a newly  laid road . In the absence  of road  markings,  traffic  
discipline  cannot  be attained . Road  safety  furniture  like cat eyes,  solar  blinkers  
are missing  all along  the corridor,  which  are required  for safe access  during  
night . (Figure  149)
Footpath On Lal Bagh Road
Footpath On Devangasamaja RoadFigure 148Dislocation of Signboards  Along The Corridor Figure  149.Condition of Road Surface & Road Marking  Along The Corridor 
Figure 150.Condition of Footpath Along The CorridorSignage  / Marking  / Signals
192
Road  Surface  at Subbiah  Circle
Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
156
It is observed  that majority  of the land  use pattern  along  the corridor  is commercial  and the rest are for public  and parks . It is also observed  that most  of the existing  
residential  land  uses  have  been  used  for commercial  purposes . (Figure  151)
Figure 151. Land use Details Along The Corridor Land  Use Along  The Corridor
193Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
157
PART B 
SURVEY ANALYSIS
158
In order  to assess  the existing  traffic  and transport  characteristic  of 
the corridor  ( Table  40) and to decide  on the type  of traffic  
management  measures  needed,  traffic  surveys  were  carried  
out.(Figure  152)
 The survey  particulars  are as presented  in the following  paragraphs :Sl. No Type  of Survey Quantity
1 Turning  Volume  Count 7 Intersections
2 Pedestrian  Count  Survey 7 Intersections
3 Speed  And  Delay  (Bus  & Car) 5.5 Km
4 Road  Network  Inventory 5.5 Km
5 Traffic  Signal  Phasing 7
Traffic  volumes  were  extracted  from  the turning  volume  counts  conducted  along  the corridor . The vehicles  counted  were  converted  to Passenger  
Car Units  (PCUs)  by adopting  equivalent  PCUs . The PCUs  corresponding  to urban  roads  as per IRC: 106-1990  were  used  and the Peak  Hour  Traffic  
Volumes  are as presented  Table  59.Table 40: Study Corridors For Traffic Surveys
Figure 152. Traffic Volume Count Locations  Along The Corridor Traffic  Survey  Details
Traffic  Volume  Counts
194Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
159
Table 41:Traffic Volume Count Survey Conducted Along The Corridor
195One Way Stretch
Two Way Stretch
Among  the 9 Mid-Block  locations,  traffic  volume  along  JC Road  (Between  Minerva  Circle  and JC Road  Junction)  is found  to be highest  
with  9324  PCUs  during  morning  peak  hour  and 8198  PCUs  during  evening  peak  hour .Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
160
196Volume  to Capacity  Ratio  (V/C  Ratio)  is defined  as the ratio  of peak  hour  traffic  flow  rate to capacity  and Level  of Service  (LOS)  is defined  as the a 
qualitative  measure,  describing  operational  conditions  within  a traffic  stream  and their  perception  by the drivers/passengers . 
Universally,  LOS  is lettering  scheme  ranging  from  A to F. LOS  ‘A’ represents  highest  quality  of service  whereas  LOS  ‘F’ represents  heavily  
congested  flow  where  traffic  demand  exceeds  capacity . The service  measures  used  for defining  LOS  are density  and volume -to-capacity  ratio . 
For computation  of V/C  Ratio  the capacity  values  have  been  adopted  based  on the road  geometrics  by applying  adjustment  factors  (as per Indo  
Highway  Capacity  Manual  2012 -2017 ) conforming  to the site conditions . 
The ratio  of peak  hour  traffic  flow  rate to capacity  (V/C  Ratio)  and the Level  of Service  (LOS)  of the road  sections  along  JC Road/Lal  Bagh  Corridor  
are presented  below .(Table  42)
Sl. No. Road NameTypology of 
RoadCapacityMorning Peak 
Hour Volume 
(PCUs)V/C RatioLevel of 
ServiceEvening Peak 
Hour Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
RatioLevel of 
Service
1 Devanga Samaja Road 3 Lanes 3600 3851 1.07 LOS F 3953 1.10 LOS F
2Lalbagh Main Road -
Between Subbiah  Circle 
and Urvashi Theatre 
Junction4 Lane 5400 3352 0.62 LOS C 3418 0.63 LOS C
3Lalbagh Main Road -
Between Urvashi 
Theatre Junction and 
Lal Bagh  Main Gate4 Lane 5400 3927 0.73 LOS C 3757 0.70 LOS C
4Kumbigal  Road -
Between Lalbagh Main 
Gate Junction and 
Lalbagh West Gate 
Junction3 Lanes 3600 4041 1.12 LOS F 4141 1.15 LOS F
5JC Road -Between 
Minerva Circle and JC 
Road Junction4 Lane 5400 9324 1.73 LOS F 8198 1.52 LOS F
6JC Road -Between JC 
Road Junction and 
Town Hall Junction4 Lane 5400 5199 0.96 LOS E 4831 0.89 LOS E
7Mysore Road -Between 
N.R Square and Police 
Square4 Lane 5400 6944 1.29 LOS F 7087 1.31 LOS FTable 42:Traffic Volume to Capacity Ratio Conducted Along The CorridorVolume  to Capacity  Ratio  (V/C)  and Level  of ServiceComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
161
197
Road Name  
Typology of 
Road  
Capacity*  Morning Peak  Evening Peak  
Morning Peak 
Hour Volume 
(PCUs)  V/C Ratio  Level of 
Service*  Evening Peak 
Hour Volume 
(PCUs)  V/C Ratio  Level of 
Service*  
Rasthriya 
Vidhyalaya 
Road -
Between 
Lalbagh 
West Gate 
Junction 
and 
Minerva 
Junction  4 Lane  
Towards 
Minerva Circle  
Towards 
Lalbagh  
Towards 
Minerva Circle  
Towards 
Lalbagh  
Towards 
Minerva Circle  
Towards 
Lalbagh  
Towards 
Minerva Circle  
Towards 
Lalbagh  
Towards 
Minerva Circle  
Towards 
Lalbagh  
Towards 
Minerva Circle  
Towards 
Lalbagh  
Towards 
Minerva Circle  
Towards 
Lalbagh  
2700  2700  3533  435 1.31  0.16  LOS F  LOS A  3456  449 1.28  0.17  LOS F  LOS A  
Mysore 
Road -
Between 
Town Hall 
Junction 
and N.R 
Square  4 Lane  
Towards 
Hudson Circle  
Towards Town 
Hall 
Towards 
Hudson Circle  
Towards Town 
Hall 
Towards 
Hudson Circle  
Towards Town 
Hall 
Towards 
Hudson Circle  
Towards Town 
Hall 
Towards 
Hudson Circle  
Towards Town 
Hall 
Towards 
Hudson Circle  
Towards Town 
Hall 
Towards 
Hudson Circle  
Towa rds Town 
Hall 
2700  2700  5373  3082  1.99  1.14  LOS B  LOS C  5384  3034  1.99  1.12  LOS F  LOS F  
 
 Figure 153. Volume to Capacity Ratios along JC Road / LalBagh  Road CorridorTable 43:Traffic Volume to Capacity Ratio Conducted Along The CorridorComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
162
Figure 154. Traffic Volume Count locations Along The CorridorTable 44: Traffic Volume at Junctions  Conducted Along The Corridor
198It can be observed  that amount  of traffic  at all the locations  (except  along   Lalbagh  
Main  Road -between  Subbiah  Circle  and Lalbagh  Main  Gate  Junction)  exceeds  
beyond  its capacity  resulting  in considerable  delay  and queuing . Figure  216
The volume  to capacity  ratio  at most  of the locations  exceeds  1.0 and the Level  of 
Service  is found  to be ‘F’ which  indicates  heavily  congested  flow  where  traffic  
demand  exceeds  capacity .
Traffic  Volume  at Junctions
The traffic  volumes  at intersections  help  in assessing  the traffic  volumes  at mid-
block  locations  of the arms  of the intersection  which  together  with  journey  speed  
and road  inventory  data  aid in evaluating  the Level  of Service  (LOS)  of Urban  
Arterials  and further,  the traffic  volumes  at mid-block  also establishes  the need  for 
safe pedestrian  crossing  facility  taking  into account  the pedestrian  crossing  volumes .  
Passenger  Car Units  (PCUs)  by adopting  equivalent  PCUs . 
Among  the 7 turning  volume  count  surveyed  locations,  Hudson  Circle  is noted  to be 
carrying  the highest  peak  hour  volume  (9270  PCUs  during  morning  peak  and 9419  
PCUs  during  evening  peak)  followed  by Lalbagh  West  Gate  Junction  with  8804  
PCUs  during  morning  peak  and 8859  during  evening  peak  Traffic  volume  counts  
were  conducted  at 7 major  intersections  along  the study  corridor  to assess  the 
existing  traffic  level . The locations  were  duly  identified  based  on reconnaissance  for 
conduct  of turning  traffic  volume  count  surveys . The vehicles  counted  were  
converted  to Peak  Hour  Traffic  Volumes  are as shown  below  (Figure  154)(Table  44)Sl. 
No.Junction 
NameMorning Peak 
Hour Volume Morning  
Peak HourEvening Peak Hour 
Volume Evening 
Peak Hour Vehicl
esPCUs Vehicles PCUs
1Hudson 
Circle12572 927011.00 -
12.0012697 941919.15 -
20.15
2Urvashi 
Theatre 
Junction7449 493510.15 -
11.157515 505019.00 -
20.00
3Lalbagh West 
Gate 
Junction13055 880410.00 -
11.0013141 885919.15 -
20.15
4Minerva 
Circle12320 8383 9.15-10.15 10793 764919.30 -
20.30
5Town Hall 
Junction12272 8590 9.00-10.00 11593 801217.30 -
18.30
6Corporation 
Circle -Near 
Unity Building10416 771710.15 -
11.1510285 763919.15 -
20.15
7Corporation 
Circle -Near 
Old LIC 
Building10406 749210.45 -
11.4510517 759419.30 -
20.30Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
163
Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To NodeLength(in 
Km)Journey 
Speed 
(Kmph )Running 
Speed 
(Kmph )
One Way Hudson  CircleKalinga Rao Road 
Junction0.30 6 13
One WayKalinga  Rao 
Road  JunctionSubbaiah Circle 0.43 6 15
One Way Subbaiah  CircleUrvashi Theatre 
Junction0.96 20 25
One WayUrvashi  Theatre  
JunctionLalbagh Signal 
Junction0.19 17 21
One WayLalbagh Signal 
JunctionLalbagh West Gate 
Junction1.31 33 39
AVERAGE 17 23Table 45:Bus Speed and Delay - Towards Lalbagh West Gate (Morning 
Peak)Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To NodeLength (in 
Km)Journey 
Speed 
(Kmph )Running 
Speed 
(Kmph )
One WayLal Bagh  West  Gate  
Junction  SignalJC Road  
Junction0.79 19 24
One Way JC Road  JunctionSiddhaiah  Road  
Junction0.36 18 23
One WaySiddhaiah  Road  
JunctionTown  Hall 
Junction0.75 13 20
One Way Canara  Bank  Road Hudson  Circle 0.30 4 9
AVERAGE 14 19Table 46:Bus Speed and Delay - Towards Hudson Circle (Morning Peak)
Figure 155. Bus Speed and Delay - Towards Lalbagh West Gate (Morning Peak)
199Speed  & delay  survey  provides  a link wise  estimate  of journey  time,  running  
time  and delay . Speed  and Delay  Survey  was carried  out for Bus and Car 
separately  during  morning  and evening  peak  hours . In case of Car Speed  and 
Delay  Survey,  floating  car technique  has been  utilized  for obtaining  data  
wherein  the driver  is instructed  to follow  the designated  route  course,  while  
maintaining  the average  speed  of other  traffic  and accompanied  by trained  
members  of the team  who  record  the cumulative  time  at specified  timing  points  
to ensure  obtaining  the average  link travel  time  of the road  network . 
The overall  travel  speed  generally  referred  to as journey  speed  is the effective  
speed  between  two points  and is computed  as the distance  divided  by the total  
time  taken  by the vehicle  to complete  the journey  including  delays  incurred  en-
route .
 
The speed  maintained  by the vehicle  over  the stretch  while  in motion  is the 
running  speed  obtained  through  dividing  the distance  by the duration  of time  
while  the vehicle  is in motion  and thus  excludes  that part of time  wherein  the 
vehicle  suffers  delay . The journey  speed  and the variation  between  running  
speed  and journey  speed  is the indicator  of level  of service  and a measure  of 
congestion . The survey  data  analysis  also highlights  the causes  of delay  that 
occurs  at various  locations  such  as stopped  delay  or operational  delay .
  
The direction -wise  abstract  on analysis  along  Hudson  Circle  Corridor  
furnishing  the name  of road,  length  surveyed,  journey  speed  and running  speed  
is furnished  below  (Figure  155)(Table  45-46)Speed  and DelayComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
164
Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To Node Length(in Km)Journey 
Speed 
(Kmph)Running 
Speed( Kmph )
One WayHudson Circle 
JunctionKalinga Road 
Junction0.30 4 10
One WayKalinga Road 
JunctionSubbiah Circle 
Junction0.43 10 19
One WaySubbiah Circle 
JunctionUrvashi Theatre 
Junction0.96 11 16
One WayUrvashi Theatre 
JunctionLal Bagh West 
Gate Junction1.50 15 22
AVERAGE 10 17Table 47:Bus Speed and Delay - Towards Lalbagh West Gate (Evening 
Peak)
Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To Node Length(in Km)Journey 
Speed 
(Kmph )Running 
Speed( Kmph )
One WayLal Bagh  West  
Gate  JunctionMinerva  
Junction0.79 12 17
One WayMinerva  
JunctionTown  Hall 
Junction1.10 16 32
One WayTown  Hall 
JunctionKalinga  Road  
Junction0.26 7 11
One WayKalinga  Road  
JunctionHudson  Church  
Junction0.30 13 18
AVERAGE 12 20Table 48: Bus Speed and Delay - Towards Hudson Circle (Evening Peak)
Figure 156:Bus Speed and Delay - Towards Hudson Circle (Evening Peak)It was observed  that the lower  journey  speeds  are mainly  due to traffic  congestion  
and the delays  are mostly  occurring  at junctions . The Average  Bus Journey  Speed  
is approximately  14.5 Kmph  during  morning  peak  hour  and 11kmph  during  
evening  peak  hour .(Figure  156)
Carriagewa
y CategoryFrom Node To NodeLength(
in Km)Journe
y 
Speed 
(Kmph
)Running 
Speed
(Kmph )
One Way Hudson Circle Subbaiah Circle 0.48 22 30
One Way Subbaiah CircleDr Nanjappa  
Junction0.38 22 39
One WayDr Nanjappa  
JunctionUrvashi Theatre 
Junction0.69 35 49
One WayUrvashi Theatre 
JunctionLalbagh  Main 
Gate Signal 
Junction0.20 40 55
One WayLalbagh  Main 
Gate Signal 
JunctionLalbagh  West 
gate Signal0.90 36 50
One WayLalbagh  West 
gate SignalMinerva Circle 0.70 16 27
One Way Minerva Circle J.C. Road Junction 0.40 6 9
One WayJ.C. Road 
JunctionRavindra Kala 
Shetra  Junction0.50 8 12
One WayRavindra Kala 
Shetra  JunctionTown Hall 
Junction0.50 6 10
One WayTown Hall 
JunctionUnity Building 
Junction0.30 10 17
One WayN.R Square ( 
Unity Building)Halsooru  Police 
Station0.30 15 28
One Way Police SquareCorporation 
Circle0.20 10 28
AVERAGE 19 29Table 49: Average Morning Peak Speed & Delay Details - CarsCar Speed  and Delay
200Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
165
Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To Node Length(in Km)Journey 
Speed 
(Kmph )Running 
Speed( Kmph )
One Way Hudson Circle Subbaiah Circle 0.48 15 24
One Way Subbaiah Circle Dr Nanjappa  Junction 0.38 14 26
One Way Dr Nanjappa  Junction Urvashi Theatre Jn 0.69 30 48
One Way Urvashi Theatre Jn Lalbagh  Main Gate Signal Jn 0.20 20 30
One WayLalbagh  Main Gate Signal 
JnLalbagh  West gate Signal 0.90 26 75
One Way Lalbagh  West gate Signal Minerva Circle 0.70 20 36
One Way Minerva Circle J.C. Road Junction 0.40 5 6
One Way J.C. Road JunctionRavindra Kala Shetra  
Junction0.50 8 8
One WayRavindra Kala Shetra  
JunctionTown Hall Junction 0.50 7 12
One Way Town Hall Junction Unity Building Junction 0.30 15 28
One WayN.R Square ( Unity 
Building)Halsooru  Police Station 0.30 15 30
One Way Police Square Corporation Circle 0.20 7 19
AVERAGE 16 29Table 50 :Average Evening Peak Speed & Delay Details - CarsIt was observed  that the lower  journey  speeds  are mainly  due to traffic  congestion  and the delays  are mostly  occurring  at junctions . The Average  
car Journey  Speed  is approximately  19 Kmph  during  morning  peak  hour  and 16kmph  during  evening  peak  hour .(Figure  220-221) Table  50.
The Average  Journey  speeds  are shown  below :
201Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
166
Figure 157.Car Speed  Towards Hudson Circle (Morning Peak)
202Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
167
Figure 158 .Car Speeds Towards Hudson Circle (Evening Peak)
203Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
168
Pedestrian  Count  Survey  was carried  out to estimate  the quantum  of pedestrian  
movements  across  important  locations  with  predominant  pedestrian  activity  at 
major  junctions  for which  the turning  volume  counts  were  done  in the study  
area. This  in turn  would  help  in assessing  the need  for various  facilities  such  as 
pedestrian  subway,  foot over  bridge,  Zebra  crossings  etc. on priority  basis  in the 
short  and medium  time  frame  for safe pedestrian  movement . (Figure  159)
Pedestrians  crossings  at 7 major  junctions  along  Hudson  Circle  Corridor  were  
recorded  for a period  of 6 hours  from  9.00 AM to 12.00 PM and 5.30 PM to 8.30 
PM. Summary  of pedestrian  counts  with  peak  hour  pedestrian  characteristics  are 
shown  below .(Table  51)Sl. No. Junction NameCrossing The RoadAlong The 
Road/Footpath
TOTALMorn 
Peak 
Hour 
Vol.Morn 
Peak 
Hour 
TimeEvn. 
Peak 
Hour 
Vol.Evn. 
Peak 
Hour 
TimeDir 1 Dir 2 LHS RHS
1 Hudson Circle 3224 4673 7936 4139 19972 33809.00 - 
10.00331518.30 - 
19.30
2Urvashi 
Theatre 
Junction3657 4283 7420 9429 24789 41829.00 - 
10.00413418.30 - 
19.30
3Lalbagh  West 
Gate Junction4911 6028 8176 3661 22776 383610.00 
- 
11.00382419.30 - 
20.30
4 Minerva Circle 2599 2721 6498 2539 14357 242311.00 
- 
12.00239118.30 - 
19.30
5Town Hall 
Junction4238 4457 6872 6793 22360 375310.00 
- 
11.00374818.30 - 
19.30
6N.R 
Square(Unity  
Building)5486 4991 6896 3694 21067 354110.00 
- 
11.00354019.30 - 
20.30
7 Police  square 4066 3639 10226 6156 24087 408811.00 
- 
12.00400719.30 - 
20.30
Observations
•Pedestrian  crossings  at junctions  in the study  area ranged  from  14357  to 24789  for 6 hours  
duration . 
•Among  all the locations  in the study  area,  heavy  pedestrian  crossing  was observed  at 
Urvashi  Theatre  Junction  (24789 ) followed  by Police  Square -Near  Old LIC Building  
(24087 ).
•Maximum  pedestrian  crossings  were  observed  between  10.00 AM and 11.00 AM in the 
morning  and between  18.30 PM and 19.30 PM in the evening  at majority  of locations .
Figure 159 .Pedestrian Volume Count Locations Along The CorridorTable 51: .Pedestrian Volume Count Surveyed Along The CorridorPedestrian  Counts
Figure 160.Pedestrian Volume Count 204
Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
169
The roadway inventory details in terms of lane widths are shown in the Table below  (Table 52) 
Link No Name of Road Name of Starting PointName of Ending 
PointCarriageway Width
Road type LHS 
WidthMedianRHS 
Width
1Devanga Samaja 
Road Hudson Circle Devanga Samaja 
Junction 17.3 One way Bituminous
2 Near Juice Center 10.7 One way Bituminous
3 HCG Hospital 8.6 One way Bituminous
4
Lal Bagh Road Near Dr Nanjappa Circle Before signal 20.6 One way Bituminous
5 After Signal 25.5 One way Bituminous
6 Near Drain 19 One way Bituminous
7 Near Passport office 11 One way Bituminous
8 Near Urvashi theatre 15 One way Bituminous
9 Before lal bagh  main gate junction 14 One way Bituminous
10Lal Bagh main 
gate to west gate Near temple turning 11.4 One way Bituminous
11Rashtriya 
Vidyalaya road West gate Minerva 18 Divided two way Bituminous
12 Near Akshaya hotel 13 Divided two way Bituminous
13
J.C road Minerva circle Town hall 17 One way 
14Near Bharath Talkies 
junction Before junction 20 One way Bituminous
15 After junction 17 One way Bituminous
16 Near Shivaji Talkies 16.5 One way Bituminous
17 Near Ravindra Kalashetra 17 One way Bituminous
18 Near Canara Bank 21 Two way Bituminous
19
Mysore Road Near Halasooru Police station 14.6 One way Bituminous
20 Near Police corner junction 24 One way Bituminous
21 Hudson circle Oppt to hop com 17.6 One way Bituminous
22 Hudson circle opt to BBMP office 24 One way BituminousTable 52:The Road Inventory Survey DetailsRoad  Inventory  Survey  Details
215Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
170
Figure 161:The Road Inventory Survey for  Lal Bagh Road 216
Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
171
Figure 162 :The Road Inventory 
Survey
 for Jayachamaraja  wodayar  
road
217Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
172
218Figure 163:The Road Inventory Survey  for Jayachamaraja  wodayar  roadComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
173
PART C 
ISSUE IDENTIFICATION AND SOLUTIONS
174
Congestion due to Narrow Road Width
The narrow  road  stretch  from  Hudson  Circle  to Subbiah  Circle  is causing  a lot 
of inconvenience  to the people  besides  causing  frequent  traffic  jams . 
The road  stretch  along  the corridor  is below  par. Though  the traffic  has 
increased  manifolds  over  the years,   the road  remains  to be same . The road  
users  on this stretch  and the residents  living  along  this stretch  of road  way  rue 
the congestion,  especially  during  the peak  hours .
As per the surveys,  it is observed  that maximum  traffic  congestion  is from  
Hudson  Circle  to Subbiah  Circle  on Devanga  Samaja  Road . Even  though  the 
road  is one way,  the carriageway  width  reduces  from  17.3 meters  to 8.6 meters,  
which  is one of the main  reasons  for congestion . Apart  from  the narrow  road  
width,  unauthorized  on street  parking  by trucks,  luggage  autos  and taxis  is 
observed  that is causing  traffic  congestion . Presence  of HCG  Hospital  abutting  
the road  is adding  to the traffic  jams. (Figure  164)
17.3
10.7
8.6HUDSON Circle
Subbiah Circle
a. Recommendations
•Unauthorized  on street  parking  needs  to be prohibited ; this will help  in achieving  one 
extra  lane and help  in smooth  traffic  flow .
•Footpaths  need  to be developed  along  the stretch .
•The corner  of the HCG  hospital  needs  to be acquire  for at least  two meters  from  the 
footpath  to have  free movement  towards  Lal Bagh  for the traffic  coming  from  Hudson  
circle .
•The road  surface  needs  to be rectified  at Subbiah  Circle  due to which  the speeds  have  
being  reduced .
•Once  the above  recommendations  are carried  out, signal  optimization  needs  to be done  
with  new  signal  phase  timings .
(Figure 229 )
Figure 164 . Identification of issues from Hudson Circle to 
Subbaiah CircleFigure  165 . Identification of issues on Devanga Samaja Road
Figure  166 . Solutions For the Identified  Issues 222Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
ISSUE IDENTIFICATION AND SOLUTIONS
175
b. Benefits :
➢Delays  occurring  due to unauthorized  on street  parking  will get reduced .
➢Congestion  due to bad road  surface  at Subbiah  Circle  will be eliminated  
once  the road  surface  is rectified .
➢The signal optimization will further reduce the delays. 
In order  to have  proper  and smooth  traffic -circulation  in the area,  a minor  traffic  
management  plan  is proposed . The local  area has two feeder  roads  meeting  at 
Subbiah  circle  ;both  the roads  are one ways  reaching  towards  the circle  as 
shown  in the Figure .
As evident  from  the picture,  the traffic  coming  from   1stMission  Cross  Road  
conflicts  with  the left turning  traffic  at Subbiah  Circle  and then  crosses  the 
through  traffic  to move  the traffic  chaos  are observed .(Figure  167-168)
TRAFFIC FROM FEEDER ROAD
a. Recommendations 
➢It is proposed  to reverse  the traffic  directional  flow  of 1st mission  cross  road,  so 
that rather  than  having  two entries  on the small  stretch,  the entire  flow  can be 
diverted  on the road  which  is connecting  the junction . 
➢Once  the traffic  flow  pattern  is changed,  signal  optimization  need  to be done  
with  new  signal  phase  timings . (Figure  168)Figure  167 Identification of traffic circulation issues in Subbaiah circle
Figure  168 . Identification of traffic circulation issues in Subbaiah circleTraffic Circulation Issue
223Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
176
b. Benefits : 
➢By reversing  the traffic  flow,  signal  delays  will be reduced  drastically  at Subbiah  
Circle .
➢The signal  optimization  will further  reduce  the delays . 
Re-laid of road  surface  will improve  the traffic  speeds .
Looking  at the road  profile  of the corridor,  once  Subbaiah  Circle  is crossed,  the stretch  
on Lal Bagh  road  changes  to 6 lane undivided  one-way  .In between  this road  stretch  
from  Siddiah  Circle  to Urvashi  Theater,  there  is one location  where  a small  feeder  road  
cuts across  the main  road  next  to the drain . Since  this crossing  is without  any signal  or 
any manual  controls,  frequent  accidents  occur  at this location,  as the speeds  on Lal 
Bagh  Road  are much  higher  when  compare  to feeder  road . Hence,  speed  calming  
methods  need  to be adopted  on all feeder  roads  as well  as on the main  road  (Figure  
170).
a. Recommendations
Speed  breakers  need  to be constructed  on the both  the sides  of the feeder  roads  to control  
direct  access  of the vehicles  onto  the main  road .
Traffic  calming  measures  need  to be implemented  to control  the over  speeding  of 
vehicles  on Lal Bagh  road,  near  the drain,  which  is one of the reasons  for accidents . 
Hence,  traffic -calming  measures  as per IRC 99-2018  are recommended . Figure  169 .Solution for the Identified  issues in Subbaiah circle
Figure  170.Identification of Road Safety Issues –Subbaiah Circle
Road Safety Issue
224Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
177
The IRC recommends  applying  15 mm thick  thermoplastic  paints  in a series  of six strips  
(one  set will have  six strips) . Based  on the speeds  on the corridors,  the thermoplastic  
rumble  sets are decided .eg if the speed  is 50kmph  then  one set of rumble  strip  is 
required  and similarly,  two sets for 51-65 kmph,  three  sets for up to 80 kmph  and above  
80kmph  four sets of thermoplastic  paints  need  to be applied . The location  is as shown  
in the  Figure  171.
b. Benefits:
 Safe vehicle crossings from feeder roads will be achieved.
A Black  Spot  (accident  prone  location)  has been  identified  along  the corridor . As per the 
accident  data  collected  from  Kalasipalyam  Traffic  Police,  it was noticed  that at Minerva  
circle,  five accidents  have  occurred  in the last couple  of years,  out of which  one was a 
fatal  other  four involved  serious  injuries  as presented  in Table  72& Figure  172
A Road  Safety  Audit  has been  done  and , it has been  noted  that the accidents  are 
occurring  due to wrong  signal  phase  timings  at Miverva  Junction . The signal  phase  
timings  for the traffic  coming  from  Lal Bagh  West  Gate  on R.V. Road  and from  V.V. 
Puram  have  the same  green  signal  phase . Traffic  from  both  the roads  enter  J.C Road  at 
the same  time,  at an acute  angle,  almost  making  it a ‘Y’ shaped  entry .  This  is resulting  
in vehicle  conflict  paths  and hence,  accidents  happen  quite  regularly  at this junction  as 
shown  in Figure  172
Figure  171.Solutions for identified issues
Table 72 .Accident Record At  V.V Puram
Figure  173.Accident 
Record At  V.V PuramBlack Spot of Minerva Circle
225
Figure  172.Identification of Black Spot at Minerva CircleComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
178
a. Recommendations
➢First  step is to optimize  the entire  signal  and make  two separate  phase  times  
for traffic  coming  from  R.V.Road  and V.V.Puram  Road .
➢The junction needs to be treated with proper signage boards to road safety 
furniture. 
➢Road safety furniture such as cat eyes, AFP sheeting, solar blinkers etc. need to 
be installed.( Figure 174)
b. Benefits:
Once  the signal  optimization  is done,  accident  rate will come  down  
along  with  reduction  in signal  delays .
Figure  175. Proposed Safety Plan for Minerva Circle 226
Figure  174 .Identification of Black Spot at Minerva CircleComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
179
Key Map of all the issues along the corridor
Figure  176. Key Map of Issues along the Corridor
227Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
180
PART D
SUMMARY AND IMPACT OF MEASURES
181
Proposed integrated Elevated corridor from Minerva Circle to Hudson Circle with Elevated rotary at Hudson circle – 
Option 1
Figure 177. Proposed Elevated Corridor from Minerva circle to Hudson Circle
227The one-way loop  from  J.C. Road  to Lal Bagh  Road,  passing  through  Minerva  Circle,  Town  Hall  Circle,  N.R. Square,  Halasoor  Police  
Station  Junction,  Police  Square,  Hudson  Circle,  Devanga  Hostel  Circle,  H.B. Bakery  Circle,  Urvashi  Circle,  and Lal Bagh  Circle,  is one of the 
busiest  routes  in the Central  Business  District  (CBD) . This  loop  plays  a vital  role in connecting  southbound  traffic  to central  and eastern  
areas . However,  the current  one-way  traffic  system  has reached  its saturation  point,  prompting  the need  for a long -term  solution . To 
address  this, an elevated  corridor  is proposed  from  Minerva  Circle  to Hudson  Circle,  connecting  to an elevated  rotary  at Hudson  Circle,  
which  would  significantly  reduce  congestion  by bypassing  seven  major  intersections  in the CBD . Additionally,  the existing  Sirsi  Circle  
flyover  will link to the new loop  from  K.R. Market  to Town  Hall  Junction,  where  it will merge  with  the proposed  elevated  corridor . Details  
are illustrated  in the accompanying  figure .177
Sirsi Flyover
Minerva 
Circle
R.R.M roadKasturba 
RoadK.G. RoadComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
182
Proposed integrated Elevated corridor from Minerva Circle to Hudson Circle with Elevated rotary at Hudson circle – 
Option 1
Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
Figure 178 Proposed Elevated Corridor from Minerva circle to Hudson Circle
183
Proposed integrated Elevated corridor from Minerva Circle to Hudson Circle without Elevated Rotary - Option 2
Figure 179. Proposed Elevated Corridor from Minerva circle to Hudson Circle
227The one-way loop  from  J.C. Road  to Lal Bagh  Road,  passing  through  Minerva  Circle,  Town  Hall  Circle,  N.R. Square,  Halasoor  Police  
Station  Junction,  Police  Square,  Hudson  Circle,  Devanga  Hostel  Circle,  H.B. Bakery  Circle,  Urvashi  Circle,  and Lal Bagh  Circle,  is one of the 
busiest  routes  in the Central  Business  District  (CBD) . This  loop  plays  a vital  role in connecting  southbound  traffic  to central  and eastern  
areas . However,  the current  one-way  traffic  system  has reached  its saturation  point,  prompting  the need  for a long -term  solution . To 
address  this, an elevated  corridor  is proposed  from  Minerva  Circle  to Hudson  Circle,  connecting  to an elevated  rotary  at Hudson  Circle,  
which  would  significantly  reduce  congestion  by bypassing  seven  major  intersections  in the CBD . Additionally,  the existing  Sirsi  Circle  
flyover  will link to the new loop  from  K.R. Market  to Town  Hall  Junction,  where  it will merge  with  the proposed  elevated  corridor . Details  
are illustrated  in the accompanying  figure  179.
Sirsi Flyover
Minerva 
Circle
R.R.M roadKasturba 
RoadK.G. RoadComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
184
Proposed integrated Elevated corridor from Minerva Circle to Hudson Circle without Elevated Rotary - Option 2Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
Figure 180. Proposed Elevated Corridor from Minerva circle to Hudson Circle185
Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
Proposed integrated Elevated corridor from Minerva Circle to Hudson Circle 
The proposed  elevated  corridor  
starts  from  R.V road  just before  the 
Minerva  junction  near  the 
government  school . Another  ramp  
is proposed  from  the V.V. Puram  
side. Both  the ramps  merges  at 
Minerva  junction  and proceeds  on 
the J.C road  as a one way elevated  
corridor . This  stretch  by passes  
three   major  junctions  i.e. Minerva  
junction,  J.C road  Junction  and the 
1st cross  J.C road  junction  moving  
ahead  to Town  hall junction .
J.C road
J.C road
Minerva 
Minerva Town Hall
Figure 181. Proposed Elevated Corridor from Minerva circle to Hudson Circle186
Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
Proposed integrated Elevated corridor from Minerva Circle to Hudson Circle 
Nayandahalli
MinervaHudson Circle
Town Hall
The proposed  elevated  corridor  includes  an additional  loop  from  the 
existing  Sirsi  flyover,  connected  near  Jamia  Masjid  to accommodate  
traffic  from  the Nayandahalli  side heading  toward  Hudson  Circle . 
This  loop  merges  at the Town  Hall  junction  with  the elevated  corridor  
running  from  Minerva  to Hudson  Circle .Jamia Masjid junction
Figure 182. Proposed Elevated Corridor from Minerva circle to Hudson Circle187
Proposed integrated Elevated corridor from Minerva Circle to Hudson Circle with Elevated rotary at Hudson circle – 
Option 1
227Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
Figure 183. Proposed Elevated Corridor from Minerva circle to Hudson Circle
Hudson Circle
Kasturba Road
The proposed  elevated  corridor  
features  an elevated  rotary  encircling  
Hudson  Church  at Hudson  Circle,  
providing  access  to all connecting  
roads . This  design  aims  to facilitate  
seamless  travel,  though  traffic  
speeds  are expected  to be moderate .
Nrupatunga Road
Kasturba roadRRM road
K.G roadNrupatunga 
Road
188
Figure 184. Proposed cross section for 4 lane undivided Elevated corridor for J.C roadProposed Typical  Cross section for the 4 lane Undivided  Elevated corridor
Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  J.C. ROAD  
189
Konankuntae CrossProposed  Split  
Flyover  / 
Underpass  at 
Konankuntae  
Cross  for 
Through  Traffic  
from  
Kanakapura  to 
BanashankariCORRIDOR 
04
Kanakapura
 Road - 
Konankuntae 
Cross
Existing Site Location
9Figure 185. Existing Site for the Proposed Falcon City Phase -IIComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
191
Approach of the Site Area
The above  listed  corridors  proposed  for impact  assessment  are prominent  corridors  which  carry  high  density  traffic  within  the study  area 
These  corridors  feed  to the major  traffic   near  the proposed  development  and have  high  potential  for business  development . The 
commercialisation  along  these  sections  has increased  the demand  for road  space  for vehicles  with  poor  or no concerns  to the need  of 
vulnerable  users  like pedestrians  . The increased  traffic  volume  on these  streets  have  reduced  the speeds  and increased  the traffic  
congestions .
Some  of the common  observations  based  on the site reconnaissance  are:
•Unusable/  dilapidated  footpaths
•Insufficient  carriageway  capacity  within  the urban  centers  to cater  to ever  increasing  vehicle  numbers
•Unequal  distribution  of road  space
•Unscientific  and unsafe  design  of junctions  and road  curves
•Neglected  NMT  Users
•Manual  Signal  Operations .
•Insufficient  turning  radius  for ‘U’ Turns .
•Unscientific  Medain  Openings
•Too many  traffic  movements  allowed  at junctions .Proposed Underpass at Konankuntae  Cross
5Major  corridors  which  will have  the impact  of the new  development  are as listed  below .
1.Kanakapura  Road
2.Vasanthapura  Main  road
3.Anjanapura  main  road  
4.Tippasandra  main  road  
Site ObservationsComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road

Proposed Underpass at Konankuntae  
Cross
9Proposed Underpass at Konankuntae  
Cross
97
Major Roads in the Study Area
Figure 186 Major roads in the vicinity of Konankuntae cross junction
Proposed Site for Underpass , 
Konankuntae crossComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
193
997
Vasanthapura
Anjanapura Yelchanahalli
Doddakallasandra
Areas Surrounding the Project Site
Proposed Site for Underpass , 
Konankuntae crossComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
Figure 187 Major roads in the vicinity of Konankuntae cross junction 194
Proposed Underpass at Konankuntae  
Cross
9Proposed Underpass at Konankuntae  
Cross
Traffic Circulation Pattern in the Study Area
Proposed Site for Underpass , 
Konankuntae crossComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
Figure 188. Traffic circulation pattern  in the vicinity of Konankuntae cross junction195
01 Vasanthapura Junction Issue
02 Signal Optimization & Geometric Issue 
at Konankuntae cross junction
1 2
34Base Map of Hot Spots in the Study AreaProposed Underpass at Konankuntae  
Cross
9As per the site reconnaissance  survey  conducted  with  in the vicinity  of the study  area certain  hot spots  were  noted  wherein  the 
traffic  congestions  where  happening  and required  immediate  attention  to address  the issues  as shown  in the Figure  189 below . 
Further  the issue  / hot spots  are explained  in detailed .
04 Criss - crossing ,Merging & Diverging Issue near mall
03 Entry to Mall at the Konankuntae Junc
Figure 189 Task 3 – Base map showing Hot Spots in the Study AreaComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
196
Proposed Underpass at Konankuntae  
Cross
9Hot Spot 1 : Vasanthapura Junction Issue
Vasanthapura  junction  is a three  arm unsignalized  intersection  located  on Kanakapura  road  as shown  in Figure  190, which  is 
controlled  manually  by traffic  police . This  is a minor  intersection  located  just 115 meters  away  from  the Konankuntae  cross  junction . 
Since  this is a manual  control  or unsignalized  intersection  vehicle  queueing  is observed  as soon  as the signal  is left from  
Konankuntae  junction  and Vanathapura  main  road  being  a two way  road  it is difficult  to manage  the traffic  flow  at the junction  
leading  to traffic  congestion  and delays .
Apart  from  the junction  geometric  issues  strict  enforcement  is required  at this junction  in terms  of on street  parking,  signalization  
and pedestrian  crossings .
Hot Spot 1: Vasanthapura Junction 
Figure 190. Task 3 – Map showing Hot Spot 1 – Vasanthapura Junction Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
197
Towards YelchanahalliTowards KanakapuraProposed Underpass at Konankuntae  
Cross
9Vasanthapura Junction 
Figure 191  View of Vasanthapura Junction on Kanakapura RoadComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
198
Hot Spot 2: Konankuntae Junction 
9Hot Spot 2 : Konankuntae Junction Issue
Konankuntae  cross  junction  is a three  arm major  signalized  intersection,  located  on Kanakapura  road  as shown  in Figure  192, which  
is controlled  by traffic  police  during  the peak  hours  by operating  manually . The junction  is not designed  scientifically  and in a 
engineering  way,  in the presence  of Metro  rail and its station  at the junction  , road  widths  are varying  and from  30 meters  to 33 
meters  at the mouth  of the junction  .  Another  major  road  connects  at this junction  which  leads  to Anjanapura .  This  is also a two 
way  road  which  is very  narrow  and is leading  to major  traffic  congestions  and vehicle  queues .
Apart  from  the junction  improvements,  signal  optimization  need  to be done  to have  smooth  traffic  flow  along  with  strict  
enforcement  towards  unauthorized  auto  parking  , bus stopping  at the junction  and taxi pick  ups and drops  for the mall . 
Figure 192 Map Showing Hot Spot 2 - Konankuntae cross Junction on Kanakapura RoadComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
199
Traffic Congestion
Traffic Congestion
9Hot Spot 2: Konankuntae Junction 
Towards Sarakki
Towards Kanakapura
Towards Anjanapura
Figure 193. View of Konankuntae cross  Junction on Kanakapura RoadComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
200
Entry to MallHot Spot Location 3 : Entry to Mall at Konankuntae cross Junction
9Hot Spot 3 :  Entry to Mall at Konankuntae Junction Issue
This  issue  here  is that the entry  to the mall  is located  right  at the junction  as shown  in Figure  194. This  is causing  traffic  congestions  
specially  during  weekends .  Vehicles  coming  from  Banashankari  side,  Anjanapura  side ,Vanathapura  side and also from  
Kanakapura  road  need  to enter  at this point  leading  to traffic  Queues  and junction  delays . Apart  from  the vehicle  delays  , in the 
absence  of proper  pedestrian  facility  at the junction  pedestrian  vehicle  conflicts  can be seen  at this junction .
Figure 194. Map showing Hot spot 3 -  Entry to Forum Mall at Konankuntae cross junction  on Kanakapura RoadComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
201
Mall EntranceProposed Underpass at Konankuntae  
Cross
9
Mall EntranceHot Spot 3 :  Entry to Mall at Konankuntae Junction Issue
Figure 195 Picture  showing Hot spot 3 -  Entry to Forum Mall at Konankuntae cross junction  on Kanakapura 
RoadComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
202
Hot Spot 4: Criss - crossing ,Merging & Diverging Issue near mall 
AB
CDTraffic 
Movements
1.A-B
2.A-D
3.A-A’
4.A-C
5.B’-A’
6.B’-C
7.B’-D
8.B’-B
9.D-A’
10.D-C
11.D-B
12.C-A’
13.C-B
14.C-DA’B’Proposed Underpass at Konankuntae  
Cross
9Hot Spot 4 :  Criss - crossing ,Merging & Diverging Issue near mall
This  is critical  junction  wherein  we can see about  14 types  of traffic  movements  can be seen  which  is more  than  anormal  4 arm 
intersection,  the reason  being  a critical  median  opening  at Kanakapura  road  and the residential  area access  on Tippasandra  main  
road  and mall . Different  types  of traffic  movements  are shown  in the Figure  196 and in the absence  of proper  channelization  and 
geometric  designs  this junction  has become  more  cumbersome  leading  to traffic  congestions .
Figure 196. Map showing Hot spot 4 -  Criss -crossing, merging & Diversion issue near Forum Mall on Kanakapura Main roadComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
203
9Road Inventory Survey - Existing Site Condition
Footpath adjacent to the project site Entrance to the project site
Entrance to the project site Bus Stop adjacent to the project site
Figure 197.  Pictures Showing the Existing Road inventory in the vicinity of the project siteComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
204
Road Inventory Survey - Existing Site Condition
Sign board Below the Metro Station Tree on the main Carriageway
Gantry Signboard on the Carriageway Debris on the Footpath
Figure 198:  Pictures Showing the Existing Road inventory in the vicinity of the project siteComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
205
Road Inventory Survey - Existing Site Condition
Electrical Junction boxes on footpath Two Wheeler Parking on Footpath - Kanakapura Road
Vasanthapura Main road On street Parking at Vasanthapura Main road 
Figure 199. Pictures Showing the Existing Road inventory in the vicinity of the project siteComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
206
9
Topographical  Surveys - Vasanthapura Junction
KanakapuraBanashankari
Figure 200:  Topographic Survey Map of 
Vasanthapura JunctionComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
207
9
Topographical  Surveys - Konankuntae Cross Junction
KanakapuraBanashankari
Figure 201 :  Topographic Survey Map of 
Konankuntae cross  JunctionComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
208
Topographical  Surveys - 
Tippasandra Junction
KanakapuraBanashankari
Figure 202 Topographic Survey Map of Tippasandra  
JunctionComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
209
Secondary Data : Metro Drawings
Kanakapura
Banashankari
Figure 203  Topographic Survey Map of Konankuntae 
cross Metro Station 
Source: BMRCLComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
210
Secondary Data : Metro Drawings
Figure 204. Foundation Details of Metro Pillars along Kanakapura road near Konankuntae cross junction 
Source: BMRCLComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
211
Secondary Data : Metro Foundation Drawings
Source: BMRCLFigure 205:  Foundation Details of Metro Pillars 
along Kanakapura road near Konankuntae cross 
junction Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
212
Secondary Data : Metro Foundation Drawings
Figure 206:  Foundation Details of Metro Pillars 
along Kanakapura road near Konankuntae cross 
junction Source: BMRCLComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
213
Traffic Survey Locations in the Study Area
1
2
31 Vasanthapura Junction
2 Konankuntae cross junction
3 Tippasandra Junction
Figure 207:  Map Showing the Traffic Survey Locations in the Study AreaComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
214
2. Konankuntae 
Junction
3. Tippasandra  
Junction
1. Vasanthapura JunctionVideographic Volume count surveys using CCTV Cameras at all the Critical Locations
Peak  Hour  Video  graphic  traffic  counts  were  conducted  at all the four  locations,  out of which  three  locations  i.e. Location   1 , 2 and 3 traffic  
counts  were  done  for three  days  ( One weekday  and two weekends)  but at location  4 peak  hour  count  was done  for one day during  weekday . 
Cameras  were  installed  at the junctions  and recording  was done  as shown  in the Figure  208.
1 Vasanthapura Junction
2 Konankuntae cross junction3 Tippasandra Junction
Figure 208:  Pictures Showing the Cameras installed to conduct video Traffic  counts at all the  Locations in the Study AreaComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
215
Video Graphic Volume count Locations using CCTV Camera at all the Critical Locations
1. Vasanthapura Junction 3. Tippasandra  Junction
2. Konankuntae Junction
Figure 209.  Pictures Showing the  video recordings  at Traffic Survey Locations in the Study AreaComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
216
1
241 Yelachenahalli -Konankuntae Jn
2 Anjanapura -Konankuntae Jn
3 Doddakalsandra -Konankuntae Jn
4 Vasanthapura -Bannerghatta Road
Spot Speeds  Survey roads in the Study Area
Spot  Speeds  surveys  were  conducted  at four  locations  as shown  in the Figure  210,  The spot  
speeds  were  taken  at around  4:00 PM in a weekday,  to assess  the spot  speeds  on the adjoining  
roads  of the proposed  development .  When  we compare  the spot  speeds  with  speed   and delay  
we can see that speeds  get reduced  when  it reaches  the junction  and increase  as soon  as you 
move  away  from  the junction  on Kanakapura  road . Hence  when  the entry  & exit is designed  
on this road  will add up to the traffic  increasing  the congestion  level  and reducing  the speeds,  
hence  need  to have  a long  term  proposal  to mitigate  this issue .
3Figure 210.  Map Showing the Spot Speed Locations in the Study 
AreaComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
217
14Table 53 : Traffic Flow at Intersections (PCUs)
From  Table  53 it can be inferred  that the following  intersections  carry  more  than  10,000 PCUs  during  the peak  hour . 
•Konankuntae  Cross  Junction  
•Vasanthapura  Junction
The movement  wise  traffic  flow  diagrams  have  been  shown  in Figures .Sl. No. Junction NameTotal Flow 
(PCUs)Morning Peak Hour Volume 
(PCUs)Evening Peak Hour Volume (PCUs)
Peak TimePeak Hr. 
Flow 
(PCUs)Peak Hour 
SharePeak TimePeak Hr. 
Flow 
(PCUs)Peak Hour 
Share
1 Forum Mall Junction 97791 9:15-10:15 8341 8.50% 18:15 -19:15 8920 9.10%
2Konankunte  Cross 
Junction111003 8:45-9:45 10970 9.90% 18:00 -19:00 9778 8.80%
3 Vasanthpura  Junction 137223 8:45-9:45 12797 9.30% 18:00 -19:00 11863 8.60%
4Adayar Ananda Bhavan, 
Raghuvanahalli Junction 70837 8:45-9:45 6139 8.67% 18:15 -19:15 6483 9.15%Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
218
14Volume to Capacity Ratio (V/C) and Level of Service
Volume  to Capacity  Ratio  (V/C  Ratio)  is defined  as the ratio  of peak  hour  traffic  flow  rate to capacity  and Level  of Service  (LOS)  is defined  as 
the a qualitative  measure,  describing  operational  conditions  within  a traffic  stream  and their  perception  by the drivers/passengers . 
Universally,  LOS  is lettering  scheme  ranging  from  A to F. LOS  ‘A’ represents  highest  quality  of service  whereas  LOS  ‘F’ represents  heavily  
congested  flow  where  traffic  demand  exceeds  capacity . The service  measures  used  for defining  LOS  are density  and volume -to-capacity  ratio . 
For computation  of V/C  Ratio  the capacity  values  have  been  adopted  based  on the road  geometrics  (as per Indo  Highway  Capacity  Manual  
2012 -2017 ) conforming  to the site conditions  as shown  in Table  54.
Table 54 Existing V/C and Level of Service for Roadway Segments
V/C LOS Performance
0.0 -0.2 A Excellent
0.2-0.4 B Above  Average
0.4-0.6 C Average  
0.6-0.8 D Below  Average
0.8-1.0 E Poor
1.0-1.2 F Very  Poor
The ratio  of peak  hour  traffic  flow  rate to capacity  (V/C  Ratio)  and the Level  of Service  (LOS)  of the road  sections  along  Kanakapura   Road  
Corridor  are presented  pictorially  in Figure  211.Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
219
Table 55. Traffic Volume to Capacity ratio and Level of Service 
Sl. No. Road NameEXISTING 
Towards Banashankari Towards Kanakapura
CapacityMornin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Morning 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Morning 
PeakEvening 
Peak Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evening 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Evening 
PeakMorning 
Peak Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Morning 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Morning 
PeakEvening 
Peak Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evening 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Evening 
Peak
1Between 
Vasanthapur
a Junction 
and 
Bikasipura 
Main Road2700 6192 2.29 LOS F 4776 1.77 LOS F 4005 1.48 LOS F 4658 1.73 LOS F
2Between 
Konankunte 
Junction and 
Vasanthpura 
Junction2700 4859 1.8 LOS F 4133 1.53 LOS F 4410 1.63 LOS F 4134 1.53 LOS F
3Between 
Forum Mall 
Junction and 
Konankuntae 
Junction2700 4614 1.71 LOS F 4410 1.63 LOS F 3125 1.16 LOS F 3672 1.36 LOS F
4Between 
Forum Mall 
Junction and 
Doddakalsan
dra Junction2700 3633 1.35 LOS F 3267 1.21 LOS F 2319 0.86 LOS E 2910 1.08 LOS F
5Between 
Doddakalsan
dra Junction 
and 80 Feet 
Junction2700 3051 1.13 LOS F 3267 1.21 LOS F 1980 0.73 LOS C 2910 1.08 LOS F
It can be observed  that amount  of traffic  approaching  at all the locations  (except  Between  Konankuntae  Junction  and Vasanthapura  Junction  
towards  Banashankari ) exceeds  beyond  its capacity  resulting  in considerable  delay  and queuing . 
The volume  to capacity  ratio  at most  of the locations  exceeds  1.0 and the Level  of Service  is found  to be ‘F’ which  indicates  heavily  congested  
flow  where  traffic  demand  exceeds  capacityComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
220
14Figure 211:  Mid-block Traffic (PCUs) during Morning Peak  (Weekday -Monday)
Traffic Analysis Results - PCU -V/C Ratio & LOS: Week Day Monday Morning PeakComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
221
14 Figure 212 : Mid -block Traffic (PCUs) during Evening Peak  (Weekday -Monday)
Traffic Analysis Results - PCU -V/C Ratio & LOS: Week Day Monday Evening PeakComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
222
1
241 Yelachenahalli -Konankuntae Jn
2 Anjanapura -Konankuntae Jn
3 Doddakalsandra -Konankuntae Jn
4 Vasanthapura -Bannerghatta Road
Spot Speeds  Survey roads in the Study Area
Spot  Speeds  surveys  were  conducted  at four locations  as shown  in the Figure  213,  The 
spot  speeds  were  taken  at around  4:00 PM in a weekday,  to assess  the spot  speeds  on the 
adjoining  roads  of the proposed  development .  When  we compare  the spot  speeds  with  
speed   and delay  we can see that speeds  get reduced  when  it reaches  the junction  and 
increase  as soon  as you move  away  from  the junction  on Kanakapura  road . Hence  when  
the entry  & exit is designed  on this road  will add up to the traffic  increasing  the 
congestion  level  and reducing  the speeds,  hence  need  to have  a long  term  proposal  to 
mitigate  this issue .
3
Figure 213: Map showing Spot Speed Survey locationsComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
223
9Spot Speed Data
Name of the locationYelchanahalli - Konankuntae 
Jn
Slno. Cars Two Wheelars Buses LCV's Auto
1 38 43 26 21 31
2 52 52 24 18 26
3 42 38 32 24 24
4 36 34 34 36 18
5 32 46 28 26 30
6 26 40 26 34 28
7 34 38 38 22 26
8 29 26 20 19 32
9 35 45 18 29 22
10 26 54 24 31 25
Total 350 416 270 260 262
Average 35 41.6 27 26 26.2
Name of the location Anjanapura -Konankuntae Jn
Slno. Cars Two Wheelars Buses LCV's Auto
1 32 30 18 22 28
2 28 36 22 18 32
3 26 24 19 24 26
4 30 34 24 20 20
5 28 29 20 17 16
6 26 38 26 28 24
7 20 18 21 25 21
8 32 26 14 22 28
9 18 22 19 14 16
10 20 29 22 20 19
Total 260 286 205 210 230
Average 26 28.6 20.5 21 2326.0028.60
20.50 21.0023.00
Cars Two Wheelars Buses LCV's Auto
Anjanapurpura -Konanakunte JnAVERAGE SPEED BETWEEN ANJANAPURA –
KONANKUNTAE JN3541.6
2726 26.2
Cars Two Wheelars Buses LCV's Auto
Yelachenahalli -Konanakunte JnAVERAGE SPEED  BETWEEN 
YELACHENAHALLI – KONANKUNTAE 
JUN
Figure 214: Spot Speed Details between Yelchanahalli & Konankuntae cross
Figure 215: Spot Speed Details between Anjanapura  & Konankuntae crossComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
224
9Spot Speed Data
Name of the locationVasanthapura -Bannerghatta 
Road
Slno. Cars Two Wheelars Buses LCV's Auto
1 32 28 22 21 26
2 24 34 28 26 24
3 26 36 26 22 32
4 20 28 18 24 28
5 28 32 16 28 34
6 18 41 24 18 31
7 24 23 22 16 26
8 28 18 18 28 38
9 34 32 19 30 21
10 28 38 21 25 26
Total 262 310 214 238 286
Average 26.2 31 21.4 23.8 28.626.231
21.423.828.6
Cars Two 
WheelarsBuses LCV's AutoAVERAGE SPEED IN BETWEEN 
VASANTHAPURA – BANNERGHATTA 
ROAD    Name of the locationDoddakalsandra -
Konankuntae Jn
Slno. CarsTwo 
Wheelars Buses LCV's Auto
1 48 48 39 38 38
2 46 42 43 46 32
3 40 46 36 44 36
4 44 33 41 32 30
5 36 56 46 48 44
6 52 44 39 52 48
7 48 50 32 41 42
8 44 40 51 36 36
9 54 32 46 44 40
10 42 46 44 41 42
Total 454 437 417 422 388
Average 45.4 43.7 41.7 42.2 38.845.4
43.7
41.742.2
38.8
Cars Two Wheelars Buses LCV's Auto
Doddakalsandra -Konanakunte JnAVERAGE SPEED IN BETWEEN 
DODDAKALASANDRA – KONANKUNTAE JUN 
Figure 216: Spot Speed Details between Doddakalasandra  & Konankuntae cross
Figure 217: Spot Speed Details between Vasanthapura  & Bannerghatta roadComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
225
Speed  and Delay
Speed  & delay  survey  provides  a link wise  estimate  of journey  time,  running  time  and delay . Speed  and Delay  Survey  was carried  out Car during  
morning  and evening  peak  hours . Floating  car technique  has been  utilized  for obtaining  data  wherein  the driver  is instructed  to follow  the 
designated  route  course,  while  maintaining  the average  speed  of other  traffic  and accompanied  by trained  members  of the team  who  record  the 
cumulative  time  at specified  timing  points  to ensure  obtaining  the average  link travel  time  of the road  network . 
The overall  travel  speed  generally  referred  to as journey  speed  is the effective  speed  between  two points  and is computed  as the distance  divided  
by the total  time  taken  by the vehicle  to complete  the journey  including  delays  incurred  en-route . 
The speed  maintained  by the vehicle  over  the stretch  while  in motion  is the running  speed  obtained  through  dividing  the distance  by the duration  
of time  while  the vehicle  is in motion  and thus  excludes  that part of time  wherein  the vehicle  suffers  delay . The journey  speed  and the variation  
between  running  speed  and journey  speed  is the indicator  of level  of service  and a measure  of congestion . The survey  data  analysis  also 
highlights  the causes  of delay  that occur  at various  locations  such  as stopped  delay  or operational  delay .  
The direction -wise  abstract  of analysis  along  the study  area  by the name  of road,  length  surveyed,  overall  travel  time,  journey  speed  and running  
speed  are furnished  below  in Table  56.
Sl.No .Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To NodeLengt
h
(in 
Km)Delay 
(Sec)Journey Time  
(Sec)Running Time 
(Sec)Journey Speed 
(Kmph)Running Speed 
(Kmph)
1 Two WayVasanthpura  
Junction Konankunte  
Cross0.11 35 69 34 6 12
2 Two WayKonankunte 
CrossForum Mall 
Junction0.19 25 74 49 9 14
3 Two WayKonankunte 
CrossKairuchi Junction 0.45 15 82 67 20 24Table 56. Car Speed and Delay -Morning Peak
Sl.No .Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To NodeLengt
h
(in 
Km)Delay 
(Sec)Journey Time  
(Sec)Running Time 
(Sec)Journey Speed 
(Kmph)Running Speed 
(Kmph)
1 Two Way Kairuchi  JunctionKonankunte  
Cross0.45 89 157 68 10 24
2 Two WayForum Mall 
JunctionKonankunte  
Cross0.19 32 81 49 8 14
3 Two WayKonankunte 
CrossVasanthpura 
Junction 0.11 15 82 67 5 6Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
226
Sl.No .Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To NodeLength
(in 
Km)Delay 
(Sec)Journey Time  
(Sec)Running 
Time (Sec)Journey Speed 
(Kmph)Running Speed 
(Kmph)
1 Two WayVasanthpura 
Junction Konankuntae 
Cross0.11 41 73 32 5 12
2 Two WayKonankunte 
CrossForum Mall 
Junction0.19 30 82 52 8 13
3 Two WayKonankunte 
CrossKairuchi 
Junction0.45 21 93 72 17 23
Sl.No .Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To NodeLength
(in 
Km)Delay 
(Sec)Journey 
Time  (Sec)Running 
Time (Sec)Journey Speed 
(Kmph)Running Speed 
(Kmph)
1 Two WayKairuchi  
JunctionKonankunte 
Cross0.45 96 176 80 9 20
2 Two WayForum Mall 
JunctionKonankuntae 
Cross0.19 35 88 53 8 13
3 Two WayKonankunte 
CrossVasanthapura 
Junction 0.11 20 85 65 5 6Table  57 Car Speed and Delay -Evening PeakComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
227
Proposed Underpass at Konankuntae  Cross
997
Journey Speed 
(Kmph)Running Speed 
(Kmph)
6 12
Journey Speed 
(Kmph)Running Speed 
(Kmph)
9 14 Journey Speed 
(Kmph)Running Speed 
(Kmph)
20 24
Node 1 Vasanthapura Junction
Node 2 Konankuntae cross junction
Node 3 Tippasandra Junction
Node 4 Kai Ruchi Junction21
43Overall Speeds of cars on the adjacent roads of the proposed project site 
Figure 218. Map Showing the details of Journey Speed and Running Speed in the Study AreaComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
228
Mitigation Measures
In order  to have  the transportation  system  in the project  vicinity  operate  at satisfactory  levels  of service  several  improvements  are recommended . 
The roadway  improvements  are categorized  under  short  term,  medium  term  and long  term . Installation  of short -term  and medium  term  
improvements  alone  will not in itself  make  the transportation  system  operate  at desired  level  of service . For full operational  efficiency  short  term,  
medium  term  and long  term  improvements  are essential . With  the installation  of these  improvements  the transportation  system  within  the project  
vicinity  will operate  at satisfactory  level  of service . 
Proposed Underpass along Kanakapura Road
From  the traffic  analysis  it is evident  that  Kanakapura  Road  between  Vasanthapura  Junction  and Doddakalsandra  Junction  is the most  congested  
stretch  in the project  vicinity   with  a volume -capacity  ratio  exceeding  1 and a journey  speed  below  10 kmph  during  peak  hours .
Existing  roads  are inadequate  to serve  the traffic  along  Kanakapura  Road . Any  traffic  from  adjacent  roads  and developments  to these  roads  will 
choke  the existing  roadway  circulation  in the neighborhood . Hence  consultants   have  proposed  a grade  separator   (Tunnel  / Underpass)  to relieve  
the congestion  on Kanakapura  Road . 
Table  58 Level of service with Underpass Proposal -Towards Kanakapura 
Sl. No. Road Name CapacityEXISTING WITH IMPROVEMENTS
Towards Kanakapura Towards Kanakapura  (At Grade)
Morni
ng 
Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs
)V/C 
Ratio -
Morni
ng 
PeakLevel 
of 
Servic
e-
Morni
ng 
PeakEvenin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs
)V/C 
Ratio -
Evenin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Servic
e-
Evenin
g PeakTravel 
Speed 
(Kmph
)Morni
ng 
Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs
)V/C 
Ratio -
Morni
ng 
PeakLevel 
of 
Servic
e-
Morni
ng 
PeakEvenin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs
)V/C 
Ratio -
Evenin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Servic
e-
Eveni
ng 
PeakTravel 
Speed 
(Kmp
h)
1Between Konankunte 
Junction and Vasanthpura 
Junction2700 4410 1.63 LOS F 4134 1.53 LOS F 10
18870.7 LOS C
18130.67 LOS C 30
2Between Konankunte 
Junction and Forum Mall 
Junction2700 3125 1.16 LOS F 3672 1.36 LOS F 10 549 0.20 LOS B 815 0.30 LOS B 40The comparison  between  existing  operational  scenario  and the operational  scenario  after  construction  of the tunnel  is tabulated  in Table  58.  
From  Table  20 it can be seen  that with  the construction  of tunnel,  there  will be considerable  reduction  in Volume  to Capacity  Ratio  (V/C  Ratio),  
enhanced  Level  of Service  and increased  Journey  Speeds  along  Kanakapura  Road  Corridor . Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
229
From the above table it is evident that with this proposed underpass, the traffic (At grade) between Vasanthapura Junction an d Doddakalsandra  
Junction will drastically reduce relieving congestion along this stretch.Table  59 Level of service with Underpass Proposal -Towards Banashankari
Sl. No. Road Name CapacityEXISTING WITH IMPROVEMENTS
Towards Banashankari Towards Banashankari(At Grade)
Mornin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Mornin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Service -
Mornin
g PeakEvenin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evenin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Service -
Evenin
g PeakTravel 
SpeedMornin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Mornin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Service -
Mornin
g PeakEvenin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evenin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Service
-
Evenin
g PeakTravel 
Speed
1Between Konankunte 
Junction and Vasanthpura 
Junction2700 4859 1.80 LOS F 4133 1.53 LOS F 15 1344 0.50 LOS C 1430 0.53 LOS C 30
2Between Konankunte 
Junction and Forum Mall 
Junction2700 4614 1.71 LOS F 4410 1.63 LOS F 15 1025 0.38 LOS B 921 0.34 LOS B 40
The LOS  conditions  for the horizon  year  scenarios  (With  and Without  Improvements)   for the years  2031 , 2041  and 2051  are presented  in 
the following  tables  Future Operating Conditions
The future peak hour traffic volumes for the future years 2031, 2041  and the year 2051 conditions were forecasted using RTO growth rates. The 
growth rate obtained from the RTO data were used to forecast the future year traffic volumes at the study roadway segments. 
Sl. No. Road Name CapacityEXISTING WITH IMPROVEMENTS
Towards Kanakapura Towards Kanakapura  (At Grade)
Mornin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Mornin
g PeakLevel of 
Service -
Mornin
g PeakEvening 
Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evening 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Evening 
PeakTravel 
SpeedMornin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Mornin
g PeakLevel of 
Service -
Mornin
g PeakEvening 
Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evening 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Evening 
PeakTravel 
Speed
1Between Konankunte  Junction 
and Vasanthpura  Junction2700 5558 2.06 LOS F 5187 1.92 LOS F 10
23520.87 LOS E
22570.84 LOS D 30
2Between Konankunte Junction 
and Forum Mall Junction2700 3979 1.47 LOS F 4666 1.73 LOS F 10 685 0.25 LOS B 1027 0.38 LOS B 40Table  60. Traffic forecast for the year 2031 -Towards Kanakapura  Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
230
Table 61. Traffic forecast for the year 2031 -Towards Banashankari
Sl. No. Road Name CapacityEXISTING WITH IMPROVEMENTS
Towards Banashankari Towards Banashankari(At Grade)
Morning 
Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Morning 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Morning 
PeakEvening 
Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evening 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Evening 
PeakTravel 
SpeedMorning 
Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Morning 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Morning 
PeakEvening 
Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evening 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Evening 
PeakTravel 
Speed
1Between Konankunte  Junction and 
Vasanthpura  Junction2700 6109 2.26 LOS F 5118 1.90 LOS F 10 1670 0.62 LOS C 1747 0.65 LOS C 30
2Between Konankunte Junction and 
Forum Mall Junction2700 5835 2.16 LOS F 5559 2.06 LOS F 10 1293 0.48 LOS C 1159 0.43 LOS B 40
Table 62. Traffic forecast for the year 2041 -Towards Kanakapura
Sl. No. Road Name CapacityEXISTING WITH IMPROVEMENTS
Towards Kanakapura Towards Kanakapura (At Grade)
Morning 
Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Morning 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Morning 
PeakEvening 
Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evening 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Evening 
PeakTravel 
SpeedMorning 
Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Morning 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Morning 
PeakEvening 
Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evening 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Evening 
PeakTravel 
Speed
1Between Konankunte Junction and 
Vasanthpura Junction2700 7885 2.9 LOS F 7323 2.7 LOS F 10
3284 1.22LOS F
3153 1.17LOS F 15
2Between Konankunte Junction and 
Forum Mall Junction2700 5721 2.1 LOS F 6706 2.5 LOS F 10 960 0.36 LOS B 1464 0.54 LOS C 30
Table 63. Traffic forecast for the year 2041 -Towards Banashankari
Sl. No. Road Name CapacityEXISTING WITH IMPROVEMENTS
Towards Banashankari Towards Banashankari(At Grade)
Morning 
Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Morning 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Morning 
PeakEvening 
Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evening 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Evening 
PeakTravel 
SpeedMorning 
Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Morning 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Morning 
PeakEvening 
Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evening 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Evening 
PeakTravel 
Speed
1Between Konankunte Junction and 
Vasanthpura Junction2700 8651 3.2 LOS F 7113 2.6 LOS F 10 2332 0.86 LOS E 2332 0.86 LOS E 25
2Between Konankunte  Junction and 
Forum Mall Junction2700 8347 3.1 LOS F 7906 2.9 LOS F 10 1845 0.68 LOS C 1648 0.61 LOS C 30Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
231
Table 64. Traffic forecast for the year 2051 -Towards Kanakapura
Sl. No. Road Name CapacityEXISTING WITH IMPROVEMENTS
Towards Kanakapura Towards Kanakapura  (At Grade)
Morning 
Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Morning 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Morning 
PeakEvening 
Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evening 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Evening 
PeakTravel 
SpeedMorning 
Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Morning 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Morning 
PeakEvening 
Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evening 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Evening 
PeakTravel 
Speed
1Between Konankunte Junction and 
Vasanthpura Junction2700 11401 4.2 LOS F 10555 3.9 LOS F 10
4670 1.73LOS F
4501 1.67LOS F 15
2Between Konankunte Junction and 
Forum Mall Junction2700 8373 3.1 LOS F 9833 3.6 LOS F 10 1377 0.51 LOS C 2134 0.79 LOS D 30
Table 65.Traffic forecast for the year 2051 -Towards Banashankari
Sl. No. Road Name CapacityEXISTING WITH IMPROVEMENTS
Towards Banashankari Towards Banashankari(At Grade)
Morning 
Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Morning 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Morning 
PeakEvening 
Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evening 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Evening 
PeakTravel 
SpeedMorning 
Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Morning 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Morning 
PeakEvening 
Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evening 
PeakLevel of 
Service -
Evening 
PeakTravel 
Speed
1Between Konankunte Junction and 
Vasanthpura Junction2700 12506 4.6 LOS F 10127 3.8 LOS F 10 3337 1.24 LOS F 3358 1.24 LOS F 15
2Between Konankunte Junction and 
Forum Mall Junction2700 12210 4.5 LOS F 11489 4.3 LOS F 10 2696 1.00 LOS E 2396 0.89 LOS E 15
From  the above  traffic  forecasting  findings  for the proposed  underpass  indicates  that its construction  could  significantly  alleviate  congestion,  
increase  travel  speeds  and enhance  safety  along  Kanakapura  Road  Corridor .Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
232
Hot Spot 2: Konankuntae Junction 
9Hot Spot 2 : Konankuntae Junction Issue
Konankuntae  cross  junction  is a three  arm major  signalized  intersection,  located  on Kanakapura  road  as shown  in Figure  219, which  
is controlled  by traffic  police  during  the peak  hours  by operating  manually . The junction  is not designed  scientifically  and in a 
engineering  way,  in the presence  of Metro  rail and its station  at the junction  , road  widths  are varying  and from  30 meters  to 33 
meters  at the mouth  of the junction  .  Another  major  road  connects  at this junction  which  leads  to Anjanapura .  This  is also a two 
way  road  which  is very  narrow  and is leading  to major  traffic  congestions  and vehicle  queues .
Apart  from  the junction  improvements,  signal  optimization  need  to be done  to have  smooth  traffic  flow  along  with  strict  
enforcement  towards  unauthorized  auto  parking  , bus stopping  at the junction  and taxi pick  ups and drops  for the mall . 
Figure 219 Map Showing Hot Spot 2 - Konankuntae cross Junction on Kanakapura RoadComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
233
Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
Proposed Underpass at Konankuntae cross, Kanakapura Road, Bangalore
RHS
LHSBanshankari
KanakapuraProposed Underpass
Figure 220: Picture  Showing the proposed Underpass Alignment
234
500mProposed  underpass alignment  
LHSRHS
Konankuntae Cross 
IntersectionProposed  Underpass Alignment
As per the traffic  surveys  analysis  and forecasting  it can be inferred  that the current  Level  of service  has already  reached  to ‘F’ and  will continue  to  
get worst  in the coming  years  and with  the upcoming  development .  To overcome  the congestion  issues   both  the options  of flyover  and a underpass  
is proposed  on either  sides  of the junction  for about  500 meters  on the LHS  and RHS   side i.e. from  Banashankari  to Kanakapura  side and vice-versa  
as shown  in the  Figure  221 below . The LOS   of  at grade  roadway  segment   would  significantly  improve  by achieving  LOS  C from  LOS  B. Also  will 
have  seamless  travel  giving  relief  for three  major  junctions  and congestion  points  for the traffic  moving  towards  Kanakapura  and Bangalore  side. 
Figure 221: Map Showing the proposed  flyover / Underpass AlignmentComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
235
Konankuntae Cross 
IntersectionProposed Split Flyover Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
Option 2: Proposed Split flyover at Konankuntae cross
As an alternative,  a split  flyover  is proposed  along  the same  alignment  to accommodate  traffic  flow  between  Banashankari  and 
Kanakapura  in both  directions . The alignment  for the split  flyover  and the underpass  remains  consistent,  allowing  for a decision  to 
be made  based  on economic  feasibility .
Figure 222: Map Showing the proposed  flyover Alignment
Proposed Underpass  Alignment towards KanakapuraProposed Underpass Alignment on LHS side of Kanakapura Road
The proposed  tunnel  is aligned   in between  the existing  Forum  mall  and the Konankuntae  Metro  Station  the land  belongs  to Prestige  group  
and the reason  that it cannot  be aligned  below  the metro  station  due to the foundation  issues  of metro  pillars  and station . Hence  the 
alignment  is designed   as shown  in the Figure  223 and also it is in line with  the proposed  project  site. The underpass  will have   concrete  
slab at all the three  junctions  and the at grade  traffic  circulation  will remain  the same  after  construction  of Underpass  and  will decrease  the 
travel  time  and increase  the speed .
Figure 223: Picture  Showing the proposed Underpass Alignment between Forum Mall and the Konankuntae Metro Station LHS
Proposed Underpass  Alignment towards Kanakapura
LHSComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
237
Proposed Underpass Alignment on LHS side of Kanakapura Road
The proposed  tunnel  is aligned   in between  the existing  Konankuntae  Metro  Station   and the private  properties  and the reason  that it 
cannot  be aligned  below  the metro  station  due to the foundation  issues  of metro  pillars  and station . Hence  the alignment  is designed   as 
shown  in the Figure  224 and also it is in line with  the proposed  project  site. The underpass  will have   concrete  slab at all the three  junctions  
and the at grade  traffic  circulation  will remain  the same  after  construction  of Underpass  and  will decrease  the travel  time  and increase  the 
speed .
Figure 224: Picture  Showing the proposed Tunnel Alignment between Forum Mall and the Konankuntae Metro Station 
RHSProposed Underpass  Alignment - towards BangaloreComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
238
A- 1200 Sqm
B- 1150 Sqm C - 1450 Sqm
E-500 Sqm
F-1200 SqmG-1000 SqmLand Acquisition details for the proposed Underpass at Konankuntae cross
Sl 
NoZone Area in 
SqmRemarks
1 A 1200 Private Property
2 B 1150 Private Property
3 C 1450 Private Property
Total Area 3800 RHSSl 
NoZone Area 
in 
SqmRemarks
1 D 500 Private Property
2 E 1200 Private Property
3 F 1000 Private Property
Total Area 2700 LHS
Total Land Acquisition required is 6500 SqmComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
Figure 225. Land Acquisition Details239
Proposed Underpass at Konankuntae  
CrossCross Section  of the Existing Kanakapura Road 
Kanakapura
Banashankari
Figure 226:  Cross section plan of the existing Kanakapura main road Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
240
Proposed Underpass at Konankuntae  
Cross
9Conceptual plan for Cross Section  of the Existing Kanakapura Road with the proposed Underpass
Kanakapura
Banashankari
Tunnel Section
Figure 227:  Conceptual cross section plan of the proposed TunnelAs mentioned  in the report  tunnel  is proposed  from  Vasanthapura  junction  to Tippasandra  junction,  the proposed   width  of the tunnel  is 7 
meters  i.e. two lane one way  with  one sided  drain  as shown  in the Figure  227 below .  Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
7 m
241
Figure 228. Proposed cross section for 4 lane Vehicle underpass at Konankuntae crossProposed Typical  Cross section for the 4 lane divided  Elevated corridor
Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
242
Proposed Underpass at Konankuntae  
Cross
9Conceptual plan for Cross Section  of the Existing Kanakapura Road with the proposed Flyover 
KanakapuraBanashankari
Figure 229:  Conceptual cross section plan of the proposed TunnelComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
243Existing Metro
Konankuntae Metro Station
Forum Mall No Right Turn, only ‘U’ Turn is allowed Towards Banashankari Towards Kanakapura
Right Turn at the signal to reach 
back gate of Falcon CityTraffic Movement at Tippasandra Junction below the Metro Station Once the flyover /Tunnel is 
constructed.
Figure 230:  Traffic Movement plan at Tippasandra JunctionComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
244
9Proposed Bus Bays
Proposed Bus BayOnce  the tunnel  is completed  the at grade  traffic  management  need  to be designed . One of the key point  is to designate  dedicated  bus stop 
with  bus bay. Hence  the bus bay is proposed  on the  corner  of the Konankuntae  cross  junction  as shown  in the Figure  231 as it can be 
planned  on top of the tunnel  without  hindering  the at grade  traffic .
Proposed Bus Bay
Figure 231:  Map Showing the location of the proposed Bus Buy  at Konankuntae cross junctionComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
245
9Proposed Pedestrian Skywalk 
It was seen  that during  the morning  peak  hours  more  than  1200  pedestrian  cross  at the junction  and during  the evening  peak  hours  it is about  
1000  pedestrian  crossing   at the junction . Hence  safety  is of major  concern  and in order  to have  safe pedestrian  access  across  the junction  
pedestrian  skywalk  is proposed  as shown  in the Figure  232.
Proposed Bus Bay
A
B
CAB C
Figure 232:  Map Showing the location of the proposed Pedestrian Skywalk at Konankuntae cross junctionComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
246
Proposed Skywalk Plan – Access from Metro Station to Mall and the proposed site
A
B C
Figure 233:  Map Showing the location of the proposed Pedestrian Skywalk at Konankuntae cross junctionAs shown  in  Figure  233, Pedestrian  skywalk  is proposed  connection  Kanakapura  road  on the RHS  i.e. at point  ‘A’ to LHS  at point  ‘B’ and the 
same  skywalk  is connecting  the Forum  mall  across  Anjanapura  main  road . Access  is provided  at both  sides  of Anjanapura  main  road  and 
Kanakapura  main  road .   Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
247
9The following  are concluded  based  on the traffic  analysis :
▪The roadway  system  in the project  vicinity  is grossly  inadequate  to handle  the project  traffic .
▪All the major  intersections  along  Kanakapura  road  such  as Forum  Mall  Junction,  Konankuntae  Junction,  Vasanthapura  junction  are expected  
to operate  at level  of service  “F” with  very  large  traffic  delays  with  or without  the project  build  out.  Over  a period  of time  these  delays  
translate  to higher  fuel consumption,  excess  travel  time,  and a higher  accident  potential .
▪Two  lane 7 meter  tunnel  is proposed  on the LHS  & RHS  side along  Kanakapura  road  between  Vasanthapura  Junction  and Forum  Mall  
Junction  which  covers  three  major  junction  which  are in series,  and will help  reduce  congestion  by providing  seamless  travel  giving  relief  to 
these  three  major  junctions  and congestion  points  for the traffic  moving  towards  Kanakapura  side. However  several  additional  improvements  
need  to be done  at the junctions  and also other  access  routes  that need  to be developed  to provide  sufficient  capacity  for project  traffic .
▪Additional  one lane of road  is proposed  on the LHS  along  Anjanapura  main  road  to cater  the traffic  demand .
▪On the RHS  side there  is little  scope  to propose  the tunnel  due to the unavailability  of land  and lot of land  acquisition  will be required  covering  
all the commercial  and residential  properties  which  might  do into the legal  issues  delaying  the project
▪Bus Bay is proposed  on the corner  of the Konankuntae  cross   above  the  proposed  tunnel . This  will help  in organizing  the bus stop  and to 
achieve  safe access  to all the road  users .
▪ Pedestrian  Skywalk  walk  is proposed  at the junction   connecting  all the major  developments  and to have  safe pedestrian  access  to all the sides  
of the junction .Summary and ConclusionsComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Konankuntae  Cross  – Kanakapura  Road
248
Raghuvanahalli CrossProposed  Split  
Flyover   at 
Adayar  Ananda  
Bhavan  
Raghuvanahalli  
Cross  
Kanakapura  CORRIDOR 
05
Kanakapura
 Road - 
Raghuvanahalli 
Cross
Existing Site LocationProposed Underpass at Konankuntae  
Cross
9Figure 234. Existing Site for the Proposed Under pass at Adayar Ananda Bhavan, Raghuvanahalli JunctionComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  RaghuvanahalliCross  – Kanakapura  Road
250
Proposed Underpass at Konankuntae  
Cross
9Existing Site Location : Adayar Ananda Bhavan, Raghuvanahalli, Kanakapura Road  Bangalore
Adayar  Ananda  Bhavan  at the Raghuvanahalli  junction  is situated  on Kanakapura  Road,  Bangalore . This  location  features  a three -arm 
intersection  where  Kanakapura  Road  meets  Swamy  Vivekananda  Road . Kanakapura  Road  serves  as the through  road,  while  Swamy  
Vivekananda  Road  connects  the surrounding  residential  areas  to Kanakapura  Road .
Bangalore
KanakapuraDoddakallasandra
Figure 235. Existing Site for the Proposed Under pass at Adayar Ananda Bhavan, Raghuvanahalli JunctionComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  RaghuvanahalliCross  – Kanakapura  Road
251
Approach of the Site Area
The above  listed  corridors  proposed  for impact  assessment  are prominent  corridors  which  carry  high  density  traffic  within  the 
study  area These  corridors  feed  to the major  traffic   near  the proposed  development  and have  high  potential  for business  
development . The commercialisation  along  these  sections  has increased  the demand  for road  space  for vehicles  with  poor  or no 
concerns  to the need  of vulnerable  users  like pedestrians  . The increased  traffic  volume  on these  streets  have  reduced  the speeds  and 
increased  the traffic  congestions .
Some  of the common  observations  based  on the site reconnaissance  are:
•Unusable/  dilapidated  footpaths
•Insufficient  carriageway  capacity  within  the urban  centers  to cater  to ever  increasing  vehicle  numbers
•Unequal  distribution  of road  space
•Unscientific  and unsafe  design  of junctions  and road  curves
•Neglected  NMT  Users
•Manual  Signal  Operations .
•Insufficient  turning  radius  for ‘U’ Turns .
•Too many  traffic  movements  allowed  at junctions .Proposed Underpass at Konankuntae  Cross
5Major  corridors  which  will have  the impact  of the new  development  are as listed  below .
1.Kanakapura  Road
2.Swamy  Vivekananda  road  2nd  cross  road
Site ObservationsComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  RaghuvanahalliCross  – Kanakapura  Road
252
Proposed Underpass at Konankuntae  
Cross
9
Adayar Ananda Bhavan, 
Raghuvanahalli  junction
Doddakallasandra
KanakapuraKonankuntae
Areas Surrounding the Project Site
This  is a key intersection  connecting  important  areas  such  as Gubbalala , Shara  Layout,  Raghavendra  Layout,  Bagegowda  Layout,  and 
Doddakallasandra . Traffic  congestion  is commonly  observed  at this junction . Since  it serves  as a major  connecting  point  for traffic  coming  
from  the Kanakapura  side towards  Bangalore  and vice-versa,  measures  need  to be implemented  to alleviate  the congestion  at the junction .
Figure 236. Areas Surrounding the Project SiteComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  RaghuvanahalliCross  – Kanakapura  Road
253
Proposed Underpass at Konankuntae  
Cross
9
On Site Inspection  Photos
Figure 237. Site inspection PhotosComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  RaghuvanahalliCross  – Kanakapura  Road
254
Proposed Underpass at Konankuntae  
Cross
9
On Site Inspection Photos
Figure 238.  Site inspection PhotosComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  RaghuvanahalliCross  – Kanakapura  Road
255
Proposed Underpass at Adayar Ananda Bhavan, Raghuvanahalli Junction 
Table  66 Level of service with tunnel proposal -Towards Kanakapura The comparison  between  existing  operational  scenario  and the operational  scenario  after  construction  of the underpass  is tabulated  in 
Table  66  From  Table  67 it can be seen  that with  the construction  of tunnel,  there  will be considerable  reduction  in Volume  to Capacity  
Ratio  (V/C  Ratio),  enhanced  Level  of Service  and increased  Journey  Speeds  along  Kanakapura  Road  Corridor . 
Sl. No. Road Name CapacityEXISTING WITH IMPROVEMENTS
Towards Kanakapura Towards Kanakapura  (At Grade)
Morni
ng 
Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Morni
ng 
PeakLevel 
of 
Service
-
Morni
ng 
PeakEvenin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evenin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Service
-
Evenin
g PeakTravel 
SpeedMorni
ng 
Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Morni
ng 
PeakLevel 
of 
Service
-
Morni
ng 
PeakEvenin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evenin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Servic
e-
Evenin
g PeakTravel 
Speed
1Between Forum Mall 
Junction and 
Doddakalsandra Junction2700 2319 0.86 LOS E 2910 1.08 LOS F 15 412 0.15 LOS B 661 0.24 LOS B 40
2Between Doddakalsandra 
Junction and 80 Feet Junction2700 1980 0.73 LOS C 2352 0.87 LOS E 25 73 0.03 LOS A 103 0.04 LOS A 50
Table  67. Level of service with tunnel proposal -Towards Banashankari
Sl. No. Road Name CapacityEXISTING WITH IMPROVEMENTS
Towards Banashankari Towards Banashankari(At Grade)
Mornin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Mornin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Service -
Mornin
g PeakEvenin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evenin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Service -
Evenin
g PeakTravel 
SpeedMornin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Mornin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Service -
Mornin
g PeakEvenin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evenin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Service
-
Evenin
g PeakTravel 
Speed
1Between Forum Mall Junction 
and Doddakalsandra 
Junction2700 3633 1.35 LOS F 3267 1.21 LOS F 15 695 0.26 LOS B 536 0.20 LOS B 40
2Between Doddakalsandra 
Junction and 80 Feet Junction2700 3051 1.13 LOS F 2934 1.09 LOS F 15 113 0.04 LOS A 203 0.08 LOS A 50
From the above table it is evident that with this proposed underpass, the traffic (At grade) at Adayar Ananda Bhavan, Raghuvanahalli Junction  will 
drastically reduce relieving congestion along this stretch.Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  RaghuvanahalliCross  – Kanakapura  Road
256
The LOS conditions for the horizon year scenarios (With and Without Improvements)  for the years 2031, 2041 and 2051 are 
presented in the following tables Future Operating Conditions
The future peak hour traffic volumes for the future years 2031, 2041  and the year 2051 conditions were forecasted using RTO growth rates. 
The growth rate obtained from the RTO data were used to forecast the future year traffic volumes at the study roadway segment s. 
Table 68. Traffic forecast for the year 2031 -Towards Kanakapura  
Sl. No. Road Name CapacityEXISTING WITH IMPROVEMENTS
Towards Kanakapura Towards Kanakapura (At Grade)
Morni
ng 
Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Morni
ng 
PeakLevel 
of 
Service
-
Morni
ng 
PeakEvenin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evenin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Service
-
Evenin
g PeakTravel 
SpeedMorni
ng 
Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Morni
ng 
PeakLevel 
of 
Service
-
Morni
ng 
PeakEvenin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evenin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Servic
e-
Evenin
g PeakTravel 
Speed
1Between Forum Mall 
Junction and 
Doddakalsandra Junction2700 2947 1.09 LOS F 3694 1.37 LOS F 10 519 0.19 LOS B 835 0.31 LOS B 40
2Between Doddakalsandra  
Junction and 80 Feet Junction2700 2520 0.93 LOS E 2992 1.11 LOS F 10 92 0.03 LOS A 264 0.10 LOS A 50
Table 69.Traffic forecast for the year 2031 -Towards Banashankari
Sl. No. Road Name CapacityEXISTING WITH IMPROVEMENTS
Towards Banashankari Towards Banashankari(At Grade)
Morni
ng 
Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Morni
ng 
PeakLevel 
of 
Service
-
Morni
ng 
PeakEvenin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evenin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Service
-
Evenin
g PeakTravel 
SpeedMorni
ng 
Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Morni
ng 
PeakLevel 
of 
Service
-
Morni
ng 
PeakEvenin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evenin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Servic
e-
Evenin
g PeakTravel 
Speed
1Between Forum Mall 
Junction and 
Doddakalsandra Junction2700 4630 1.71 LOS F 4140 1.53 LOS F 10 898 0.33 LOS B 687 0.25 LOS B 40
2Between Doddakalsandra 
Junction and 80 Feet Junction2700 3876 1.44 LOS F 3716 1.38 LOS F 10 144 0.05 LOS A 264 0.10 LOS A 50Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  RaghuvanahalliCross  – Kanakapura  Road
257
Table 70.Traffic forecast for the year 2041 -Towards Kanakapura
Table 71.Traffic forecast for the year 2041 -Towards BanashankariSl. No. Road Name CapacityEXISTING WITH IMPROVEMENTS
Towards Kanakapura Towards Kanakapura  (At Grade)
Mornin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Mornin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Service
-
Mornin
g PeakEvenin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evenin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Service
-
Evenin
g PeakTravel 
SpeedMornin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Mornin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Service
-
Mornin
g PeakEvenin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evenin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Service
-
Evenin
g PeakTravel 
Speed
1Between Forum Mall Junction 
and Doddakalsandra 
Junction2700 4231 1.57 LOS F 5302 1.96 LOS F 10 737 0.27 LOS B 1193 0.44 LOS B 40
2Between Doddakalsandra 
Junction and 80 Feet Junction2700 3625 1.34 LOS F 4305 1.59 LOS F 10 131 0.05 LOS A 197 0.07 LOS A 50
Sl. No. Road Name CapacityEXISTING WITH IMPROVEMENTS
Towards Banashankari Towards Banashankari(At Grade)
Morni
ng 
Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Morni
ng 
PeakLevel 
of 
Service
-
Morni
ng 
PeakEvenin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evenin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Service
-
Evenin
g PeakTravel 
SpeedMorni
ng 
Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Morni
ng 
PeakLevel 
of 
Service
-
Morni
ng 
PeakEvenin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evenin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Servic
e-
Evenin
g PeakTravel 
Speed
1Between Forum Mall 
Junction and 
Doddakalsandra Junction2700 6682 2.47 LOS F 5924 2.19 LOS F 10 1316 0.49 LOS C 996 0.37 LOS B 40
2Between Doddakalsandra 
Junction and 80 Feet Junction2700 5574 2.06 LOS F 5319 1.97 LOS F 10 208 0.08 LOS A 391 0.14 LOS A 50Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  RaghuvanahalliCross  – Kanakapura  Road
258
Table 72.Traffic forecast for the year 2051 -Towards Kanakapura
Table 73.Traffic forecast for the year 2051 -Towards Banashankari
From  the above  traffic  forecasting  findings  for the proposed  underpass  indicates  that its construction  could  significantly  alleviate  congestion,  
increase  travel  speeds  and enhance  safety  along  Kanakapura  Road  Corridor .Sl. No. Road Name CapacityEXISTING WITH IMPROVEMENTS
Towards Kanakapura Towards Kanakapura (At Grade)
Morni
ng 
Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Morni
ng 
PeakLevel 
of 
Service
-
Morni
ng 
PeakEvenin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evenin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Service
-
Evenin
g PeakTravel 
SpeedMorni
ng 
Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Morni
ng 
PeakLevel 
of 
Service
-
Morni
ng 
PeakEvenin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evenin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Servic
e-
Evenin
g PeakTravel 
Speed
1Between Forum Mall 
Junction and 
Doddakalsandra Junction2700 6189 2.29 LOS F 7762 2.87 LOS F 10 1068 0.40 LOS B 1743 0.65 LOS C 30
2Between Doddakalsandra 
Junction and 80 Feet Junction2700 5313 1.97 LOS F 6317 2.34 LOS F 10 192 0.07 LOS A 298 0.11 LOS A 40
Sl. No. Road Name CapacityEXISTING WITH IMPROVEMENTS
Towards Banashankari Towards Banashankari(At Grade)
Morni
ng 
Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Morni
ng 
PeakLevel 
of 
Service
-
Morni
ng 
PeakEvenin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evenin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Service
-
Evenin
g PeakTravel 
SpeedMorni
ng 
Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Morni
ng 
PeakLevel 
of 
Service
-
Morni
ng 
PeakEvenin
g Peak 
Hour 
Volum
e 
(PCUs)V/C 
Ratio -
Evenin
g PeakLevel 
of 
Servic
e-
Evenin
g PeakTravel 
Speed
1Between Forum Mall 
Junction and 
Doddakalsandra Junction2700 9845 3.65 LOS F 8646 3.20 LOS F 10 1963 0.73 LOS C 1466 0.54 LOS C 40
2Between Doddakalsandra 
Junction and 80 Feet Junction2700 8186 3.03 LOS F 7770 2.88 LOS F 10 304 0.11 LOS A 590 0.22 LOS B 50Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  RaghuvanahalliCross  – Kanakapura  Road
259
9
RHS LHS
Proposed Split Flyover  Alignment
Konankuntae
Kanakapura
Figure 239. Proposed Underpass Alignment Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  RaghuvanahalliCross  – Kanakapura  Road
260
Proposed Underpass at Konankuntae  
Cross
9DoddakallasandraRHSAs per the traffic  surveys  analysis  and forecasting  it can be inferred  that the current  Level  of service  has already  reached  to ‘F’ and  will 
continue  to  get worst  in the coming  years  and with  the upcoming  development .  To overcome  the congestion  issues   a Split  flyover  is 
proposed  on either  sides  of the junction  for about  350 meters  on the LHS  and RHS   side i.e. from  Banashankari  to Kanakapura  side and vice-
versa  as shown  in the  Figure  240  below . The LOS   of  at grade  roadway  segment   would  significantly  improve  by achieving  LOS  C from  
LOS  B. Also  will have  seamless  travel  giving  relief  for three  major  junctions  and congestion  points  for the traffic  moving  towards  
Kanakapura  and Bangalore  side. Proposed Split Flyover Alignment
Konankuntae
KanakapuraLHSRHS
Adayar Ananda Bhavan, 
Raghuvanahalli  junction
Figure 240. Proposed Split Flyover Alignment Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  RaghuvanahalliCross  – Kanakapura  Road
261
Figure 241. Proposed cross section for 4 lane Split flyover at Raghuvanahalli Cross Kanakapura roadProposed cross section for 4 lane Split flyover  at Raghuvanahalli Cross, Kanakapura roadComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  RaghuvanahalliCross  – Kanakapura  Road
262
KanakapuraBanashankari
Ananda Rao Circle
K.R circle 
Circle
Proposed  
Continuation  of 
Ananda  Rao Circle  
flyover  up to K.R. 
Circle  towards  
Nrupatunga  roadCORRIDOR 
06
Anand Rao 
Circle 
Flyover - 
Seshadri 
Road
The traffic  scenario  between  Anand  Rao Circle  and K.R. Circle  in Bangalore  can be challenging,  especially  during  peak  hours . This  stretch,  
which  spans  approximately  2.5 kilometers,  is part of a vital  route  connecting  different  parts  of the city. Here  are some  key points  about  the 
traffic  conditions  along  this route :
1.Heavy  Congestion : Being  in a central  area with  major  commercial  and governmental  establishments,  the road  between  Anand  Rao Circle  
and K.R. Circle  is prone  to heavy  congestion . It’s one of the busiest  stretches  in Bangalore,  particularly  during  rush  hours  in the morning  (8–
11 a.m.) and evening  (5–8 p.m.).
2.Bus and Auto  Traffic : The area around  Anand  Rao Circle  serves  as a major  hub for buses,  and there  is a lot of BMTC  (Bangalore  
Metropolitan  Transport  Corporation)  and KSRTC  (Karnataka  State  Road  Transport  Corporation)  bus traffic . This  can lead  to frequent  stops  
and starts,  slowing  down  overall  flow .
3.Signal  and Intersection  Delays : There  are multiple  signals  and intersections  along  this stretch,  including  crucial  points  like the intersection  
near  Maharani  College  and Freedom  Park . Vehicles  often  have  to wait  at signals,  which  leads  to bottlenecks,  especially  at these  junctions .
4.One -Way  and Flyover  Limitations : The flyover  at Anand  Rao Circle  helps  manage  some  traffic,  but limited  exits  and one-way  systems  
force  vehicles  to reroute,  adding  to congestion . Traffic  management  can sometimes  make  things  slower  as vehicles  try to merge  or change  
lanes  near  flyover  entry  and exit points .
1.Pedestrian  Movement : The road  sees a high  volume  of pedestrian  traffic  due to nearby  colleges,  offices,  and government  buildings . This  
adds  to the delays,  as vehicles  slow  down  near  crossings  or zebra  lines  to accommodate  pedestrians .Ananda Rao Circle flyover up to K.R. Circle Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanProposed Extension of Anand Rao Circle Flyover to Nrupatunga road – Alignment details
187Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Ananda  Rao Circle  flyover  up to K.R. Circle
264
Extending  the Anand  Rao Circle  flyover  all the way  to K.R. Circle  could  help  decongest  the traffic  between  these  points,  
but there  are both  advantages  and potential  drawbacks  to consider . Here’s  an analysis  of how  such  an extension  might  
impact  traffic  flow :
Benefits  of Extending  the Flyover
1.Reduced  Signal  Stops  and Improved  Flow : The extension  would  allow  vehicles  to bypass  K. R. Circle  which  is one of 
the most  congested  signal  in the CBD  area  and intersection  that cause  bottleneck . This  uninterrupted  flow  could  reduce  
overall  travel  time,  especially  during  peak  hours .
2.Segregation  of Long -Distance  Traffic : Extending  the flyover  could  separate  through  traffic  from  local  traffic . Vehicles  
traveling  beyond  the K.R. Circle  area  wouldn't  need  to mix with  those  making  local  stops,  reducing  congestion  at surface  
levels .
3.Faster  Bus and Public  Transport  Movement : Since  Anand  Rao Circle  is a hub for BMTC  and KSRTC  buses,  giving  
buses  a more  direct  route  might  streamline  their  schedules  and make  public  transport  more  efficient .
4.Reduction  in Pedestrian -Vehicle  Conflicts : The elevated  structure  could  also reduce  conflicts  between  pedestrians  and 
vehicles,  as fewer  cars would  be on the ground  level,  making  it safer  and more  accessible  for those  on foot.Proposed Extension of Anand Rao Circle Flyover to Nrupatunga road – Alignment detailsComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Ananda  Rao Circle  flyover  up to K.R. Circle
265
9Proposed Extension of Anand Rao Circle Flyover to Nrupatunga road – Alignment details
An elevated  flyover  has already  been  constructed  at Anand  Rao Circle  on Seshadri  Road  to address  traffic  demands . However,  with  the 
increase  in traffic,  Seshadri  Road  requires  further  upgrades,  as vehicles  coming  from  Anand  Rao Circle  are experiencing  congestion  at K.R. 
Circle,  resulting  in lengthy  traffic  queues . To accommodate  the current  traffic  flow,  a new elevated  corridor  is proposed  along  Seshadri  Road . 
This  corridor  will connect  Anand  Rao Circle,  pass  over  K.R. Circle,  and conclude  at Nrupatunga  Road,  spanning  a total  length  of 1.5 
kilometers . This  new  elevated  route  is designed  to bypass  K.R. Circle,  ensuring  a smoother  journey  towards  Hudson  Circle .
Ananda 
Rao Circle
K.R circle 
Circle1.5kmsComprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Ananda  Rao Circle  flyover  up to K.R. Circle
Figure 242. proposed extension plan of Anand Rao Flyover266
Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Ananda  Rao Circle  flyover  up to K.R. Circle
Proposed Extension of Anand Rao Circle Flyover to Nrupatunga road – Alignment details
Figure 243. proposed Extension plan of Anand Rao Flyover
Anand 
Rao circleFreedom 
Park Race
course Maharani’s 
college 
junctionK.R. Circle
Nrupatunga 
RoadPalace RoadPost Office 
roadProposed 
Elevated 
Corridor
Starting point
Ending point
267
Proposed Underpass at Konankuntae  
Cross
9Alignment Reconnaissance
Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Ananda  Rao Circle  flyover  up to K.R. Circle
Figure 244. proposed extension plan phptps   of Anand Rao Flyover268
Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Ananda  Rao Circle  flyover  up to K.R. Circle
Alignment Reconnaissance
Figure 245. proposed extension plan phptps   of Anand Rao Flyover269
Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Ananda  Rao Circle  flyover  up to K.R. Circle
Road Inventory Data
Figure 246. Road inventory data from  Anand Rao Flyover to K.R. CircleBased  on the road  inventory  details,  the width  of the carriageway  remains  relatively  consistent  along  most  of the stretch . It maintains  a 
steady  width  of approximately  24 meters,  providing  uniform  space  for vehicular  movement . However,  there  are slight  variations  at specific  
points  where  the road  widens . Notably,  near  the down  ramp  of the existing  flyover  at Anand  Rao Circle,  the carriageway  width  increases  
to 32 meters . This  expansion  likely  accommodates  merging  traffic  from  the flyover,  ensuring  smoother  vehicular  flow  in this high -traffic  
zone . Similarly,  as the road  approaches  K.R. Circle,  the width  slightly  reduces  to around  30 meters . These  localized  changes  in carriageway  
width  help  manage  traffic  dynamics  in critical  sections,  particularly  where  congestion  and vehicle  density  tend  to peak .
Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Ananda  Rao Circle  flyover  up to K.R. Circle
Road Inventory Data
Figure 247.Average Peak Hour car speed from   Anand Rao Flyover to K.R. CircleThe traffic  flow  from  Anand  Rao Circle  to K.R. Circle  showcases  significant  fluctuations  in vehicle  speeds  due to varying  road  conditions  
and signal  timings . Starting  at Anand  Rao Circle,  the average  car speed  is approximately  35 kmph,  allowing  for relatively  smooth  
movement . However,  this pace  is abruptly  reduced  to around  17 kmph  near  Freedom  Park,  primarily  due to the delay  caused  by the signal  
in that area. Following  this, the speeds  pick up slightly,  reaching  an average  of 28 kmph  as vehicles  move  towards  Maharani  College . 
Despite  this brief  improvement,  the traffic  flow  deteriorates  significantly  as cars approach  K.R. Circle,  with  speeds  dropping  sharply  to as 
low as 10-12 kmph . This  drastic  reduction  is likely  due to congestion  and bottlenecks  commonly  experienced  in this critical  junction,  
making  it a major  choke  point  along  this stretch .
271
Figure 248. Proposed cross section for the Elevated corridor
Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Ananda  Rao Circle  flyover  up to K.R. Circle
Proposed cross 4 lane undivided  Elevated corridor from Anand Rao circle to K,R. Circle
272
Figure 249. Proposed cross section for  Elevated corridor from Anand Rao circle to K,R. Circle
Comprehensive  Traffic  Management   Plan  Ananda  Rao Circle  flyover  up to K.R. Circle
Proposed cross 6 lane undivided  Elevated corridor from Anand Rao circle to K,R. Circle
273
CORRIDOR
 07
Hosur Road 
Proposed  Elevated  
Corridor  Shoolay  
circle  -Anaepalya  
Junction -Adugodi  
Junction -Forum  
junction -St.John  
Chruch  junction -
Madiwala  junction -
Silk board  Junction
Figure 250. Hosur Road CorridorHosur Road Corridor, which starts from Brigade Road junction on Residency road and ends at Begur Junction on the LHS and on t he 
RHS,  it starts from Begur Junction and ends at Museum Road Junction on Residency road. Figure 312.
It is one of the busiest  corridors,  which  starts  from  center  of the city and goes  towards  the southeastern  side towards  Chennai . 
Some  of the main  features  of the corridor  are:
•Length  of the study  corridor  is 8.6 km and is an Arterial  road .
•The road  surface  is varying  from  bituminous  to concrete .
•Lane  widths  vary  from  three  lane divided  to six lane divided  two way .
•There  are thirteen  signalized  junctions  along  the corridor .
•Metro  rail is under  construction  from  Silk Board  Junction  to Begur  Junction .CORRIDOR V:HOSUR ROAD - Starting From Brigade Road Junction To Begur Junction And From Begur Junction To Museum 
Road Junction.HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
275
Landmarks,  Attraction   & Production  Centers
The corridor  mainly  attracts  many  work  trips  due to the presence  of Software  companies . This  corridor  is considered  as software  corridor,  which  leads  to 
Bangalore’s  Electronic  city, the other  trips  are recreations  trips  as the corridor  has Forum  Mall  and other  eateries  and hotels . The parallel  corridor  has many  granite  
factories  and stockyards,  but the major  traffic  flow  takes  place  through  this corridor .  The corridor  also has army  training  institutes  and schools  .and shown  in 
Figure  313.
The corridor  houses  many  major  attraction  points  such  as:
•The corridor  starts  from  Brigade  road,  which  is considered  as the shopping  street  of Bangalore . 
•One of the oldest  Markets  - the Johnson’s  Market  is located  on this corridor,  which  is a heritage  market . 
•Shopping  malls  like EVA,  Forum  Mall,  and Market  Square  are located  on the corridor .
•Prominent  government  institutions  are located  on the corridor  such  as Silk Board,  National  Dairy  Research  Institute,  Robert  Bosch,  Geological  Survey  of India  etc. 
•The famous  St John’s  Hospital  is located  on this corridor .
Show  Silk Board  on map  Figure  251
Figure 251 Attraction/ Generation Entities/ 
Areas
Silk BoardForum Mall241
HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
276
Major  Bus Stops  along  the Corridor
There  are eighteen  bus stops  located  along  the corridor . There  are 
dedicated  bus bays  near  Forum  Mall,  near  Begur,   and near  Baldwin  
Methodist  College . For the remaining  bus stops,  there  are no bus bays  
.The absence  of bus bays  results  in buses  stopping  on the carriageway  
itself  leading  to traffic  congestion . All the Bus Stop  locations  are as 
shown  in the Figure  253.
Figure 253 Major Bus Stands/Bus stops
National Dairy Research Institute
St. John’s Hospital Market Square
EVA Mall MICO Bosch
Figure 252 Landmarks,Attraction  and production centres
242
HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
277
Corridor  Characteristics
The entire  corridor  is a varying  from  3 Lane  to 6 lane two way  with  footpath  on either  side. A small  part of the road  stretch  is the one way 
from  Brigade  Road  junction  to Shooley  Circle  on the LHS  and from  Shooley  circle  to Museum  Road  intersection . entire  corridor  is a varying  
from  3 Lane  to 6 lane two way  with  footpath  on either  side. A small  part of the road  stretch  is the one way  from  Brigade  Road  junction  to 
Shooley  Circle  on the LHS  and from  Shooley  circle  to Museum  Road  intersection . Figure  254.
Figure 254.  Major Junctions along the corridor
243
HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
278
Existing  Footpaths/Pedestrian  Facilities
It is observed  that on certain  stretches  of road,  footpath  condition  is good  but on majority  of 
the locations,  the condition  of the footpath  is poor . The pedestrian  facilities  along  the 
corridor  is taken  care well . There  are four  pedestrian  skywalks  along  entire  corridor . 
Figure  318
Figure 256. Existing footpaths/Pedestrian facilities
Road b/w Anepalya to Audugi JunctionRoad near Forum Mall
Road near Madiwala Check Post
Road  near Silk Board Flyover
Road  @ Up ramp of Silk Board Traffic at Silk Board
Road near Begur Junction SkywalkRoad near Begur Junction SkywalkRoad b/w Vellara Junction to Museum 
Road JunctionRoad b/w Vellara Junction to CMP 
Junction
Footpath Condition 
between Brigade Road and 
Vellara Junction
Figure  255. Major Junctions along the corridorFootpath Condition at Anepalya
Debris Dumped on Footpath near 
Vellara JunctionDebris Dumped on Footpath near Silk Board 
Junction
244HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
279
Figure 257. Absence of Pedestrian accessibility to Metro Stations from LHS 
Major  Junctions
There  are eleven  major  intersections  where  maximum  merging  and diverging  of 
the traffic  takes  place . The major  intersections  are (figure -320}:
•Brigade  Road  Junction - 4 arm Signalized  intersection .
•Museum  Road  Junction – 4arm Signalized  intersection .
•Shooley  Circle   –3 arm Signalized  intersection .
•Vellara  Junction - 4 arm Signalized  intersection . 
•CMP   circle - 3arm Signalized  intersection
•Adugodi  Circle  – 4arm Signalized  intersection .
•Forum  Mall  Circle  -3 arm signalized  intersection .
•Madiwala  Check  Post  Circle - 3 arm signalized  intersection .
•St John’s  Hospital  Junction  - 4 arm Signalized  intersection .
•Central  Silk Board  Junction  on Outer  Ring  Road  4 arm Signalized  intersection .
•Begur  Junction -3 arm signalized  intersection .Figure 258. Critical Junctions along the Corridor
Damaged Footpath slabs near Madiwala 
Check post JunctionDamaged Footpath slabs near 
Adugodi
Pedestrian Skywalk at Forum Mall
Pedestrian Skywalk at Madiwala 
Check Post
Pedestrian Skywalk at Begur on NHPedestrian Skywalk at St John’s 
Hospital Junction
245
HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
280
Signage/  Markings/  Signals
The corridor  lacks  right  signboards  at the right  locations ; the 
signboards  do not have  good  foundation  and most  of the signboards  
are either  damaged  or not relevant  to the site. Road  safety  aspects  are 
also ignored  along  the corridor  largely  which  is of major  concern . 
Some  of the safety  issues  are:
 
•Road  safety  furniture  like cat eyes,  solar  blinkers  are missing  all along  
the corridor,  which  are required  for safe access  during  night . 
•Road  surface  at certain  points  is very  bad resulting  in two-wheeler  
skidding,  leading  to fatal  accidents,  especially  at Madiwala  Police  
Station  and near  Adugodi . 
•Footpaths  are in very  bad condition,  which  need  to be rectified  on 
priority ; especially  on near  CMP  junction,  the granite  slabs  damaged  
and near  Madiwala  Check  post  junction  where  the slabs  are 
completely  broken . Figure  259-260
Figure 259 Conditions of signage/signals  along the corridor246
Unscientific and Damaged Sign Boards near Madiwala check Post Junction
Sign board condition along the Corridor
Figure 260. Signage/markings/signals condition along the corridor
Damaged Footpaths Parking on  Footpaths Wrongly Installed Signboards Road Safety Furniture MissingHOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
281
Land  Use Along  the Corridor
It is observed  that majority  of the land  use pattern  along  the corridor  is Commercial,  Defence   land,  Hospitals  and some  part of Industry .  It 
is also observed  that most  of the existing  residential  land  uses  have  been  used  for commercial  purposes . (shown  in Figure  261). 
Figure 261. Land use along the corridor
247
HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
282
PART B 
SURVEY ANALYSIS
283
Traffic Survey Details
In order  to assess  the existing  traffic  and transport  characteristic  of the 
corridor  and to decide  on the type  of traffic  management  measures  
needed,  traffic  surveys  were  carried  out. The survey  particulars  are as 
presented  below  in Table  74.Traffic  Volume  Counts
Traffic  volume  count  survey  was conducted  at 2 Mid-block  
locations  and for the remaining  stretches,  traffic  volumes  were  
extracted  from  the turning  volume  counts  conducted  at junctions  
along  the corridor  (Figure  269). The vehicles  counted  were  
converted  to Passenger  Car Units  (PCUs)  by adopting  equivalent  
PCUs . The PCUs  corresponding  to urban  roads  as per IRC: 106-1990  
were  used  and the Peak  Hour  Traffic  Volumes  are as presented  
below  in Table  75.Table 74. Traffic Survey Details
Table 75. Traffic Volume CountsSl.No Type of Survey Quantity
1 Turning Volume Count 7 Intersections
2 Mid-block Count 1 Location
3 Pedestrian Count Survey 7 Intersections
4 Speed And Delay (Bus & Car) 8.6 Km
5 Road Network Inventory 8.6 Km
6 Traffic Signal Phasing 7 intersections
248Sl. No Road NameMorning  
Peak HourMorning Peak Hour Volume
Evening Peak 
HourEvening Peak Hour Volume
Towards Begur road Towards M.G Road Towards Begur  road Towards M.G Road
Vehicles PCUs Vehicles PCUs Vehicles PCUs Vehicles PCUs
1Between Vellara  Junction 
and Toll Gate Bus Stop10.15 -11.15 3197 2095 1886 1562 19.15 -20.15 3333 2095 1836 1514
2Between Toll Gate Bus Stop 
and Adugodi Junction10.30 -11.30 4224 3195 3568 2837 19.00 -20.00 4244 3241 3535 2860
3Between Adugodi Junction 
and Ganapathi Temple 
Road Junction10.30 -11.30 5185 3968 4876 3810 19.00 -20.00 5196 4030 4829 3841
4Between Ganapathi Temple 
Road Junction and 
Madivala Check Post11.00 -12.00 4731 3426 4900 3861 19.15 -20.15 4719 3528 5026 3853
5Between  Madivala Check 
Post and St John's Hospital 
Junction11.00 -12.00 7600 6327 4900 3911 19.15 -20.15 7591 6418 5026 3904
6Between St John's Hospital 
Junction and Madivala 
Traffic Police Station 
Junction 9.45-10.45 5167 4131 8410 6981 19.15 -20.15 5054 3909 10035 7141
7Between Madivala Traffic 
Police Station Junction and 
Silk Board Junction9.45-10.45 5167 4131 6421 5332 19.15 -20.15 5054 3909 6393 5161
8Between Silk Board and 
NH Skywalk9.00-10.00 7214 6233 4485 3828 18.30 -19.30 7032 5888 4231 3770
9Between NH Skywalk and 
Begur Road Junction9.15-10.15 3749 3106 4463 4666 17.30 -18.30 3676 2913 4588 4742HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
284
Among  the 9 Mid-Block  locations,  traffic  volume  between   Madivala  Check  Post  and St 
John's  Hospital  Junction  is found  to be the highest  with  13554  PCUs  during  morning  
peak  hour  and 13664  PCUs  during  evening  peak  hour  followed  by Hosur  Road  stretch  
between  Silk Board  and NH Skywalk  with  a traffic  volume  of 12016  PCUs  during  
morning  peak  and 11498  PCUs  during  evening  peak  hour .
Volume  to Capacity  Ratio  (V/C)  and Level  of Service
Volume  to Capacity  Ratio  (V/C  Ratio)  is defined  as the ratio  of peak  hour  traffic  flow  
rate to capacity  and Level  of Service  (LOS)  is defined  as the a qualitative  measure,  
describing  operational  conditions  within  a traffic  stream  and their  perception  by the 
drivers/passengers . 
Universally,  LOS  is lettering  scheme  ranging  from  A to F. LOS  ‘A’ represents  highest  
quality  of service  whereas  LOS  ‘F’ represents  heavily  congested  flow  where  traffic  
demand  exceeds  capacity . The service  measures  used  for defining  LOS  are density  and 
volume -to-capacity  ratio . 
For computation  of V/C  Ratio  the capacity  values  have  been  adopted  based  on the 
road  geometrics  by applying  adjustment  factors  (as per Indo  Highway  Capacity  
Manual  2012 -2017 ) conforming  to the site conditions . 
Figure 262. Tumkur Road Corridor Traffic Count Survey LocationsAdjustment  Factors
Several  factors  would  have  impact  on traffic  movement  and on capacity  as compared  
to the base  section . The factors  considered  for assessment  of influence  on capacity  
include  on-street  parking  manoeuvres ; entry  and exit of vehicles  from  access  road  and 
bus pull in and pull out manoeuvers  in bus bays  as well  as access  points . 
249
The level  of friction  is categorized  as low,  medium  and severe  based  on the extent  of 
resistance  or speed  reduction  to the flow  as compared  to base  sections . The capacity  of 
the urban  road  section  is computed  using  the equation :
C= Co * FOP*    
FBS*FAC
Where,
C= Actual  Capacity  (PCU/hr)
Co    = Base  Capacity  for Ideal  Condition  (PCU/hr)
FOP  = Adjustment  Factor  for On-street  Parking
FBS = Adjustment  Factor  for Bus Stops
FAC = Adjustment  Factor  for Access  PointHOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
285
As the level  of friction  due to kerb  side bus stops  is high  (frequency  of buses> 30) the adjustment  factor  of 0.6 is considered  to compute  
the actual  capacity . The ratio  of peak  hour  traffic  flow  rate to capacity  (V/C  Ratio)  and the Level  of Service  (LOS)  of the road  sections  
along  Hosur  Road  Corridor  are presented  in Table  76 and Figure  270-271.
It can be observed  that the traffic  approaching  at all the locations  (except  between  Vellara  Junction  and Toll Gate  Bus Stop)  exceeds  beyond  the road  capacity  
resulting  in considerable  delay  and queuing . 
`
The volume  to capacity  ratio  at most  of the locations  exceeds  1.0 and the Level  of Service  is found  to be ‘F’ which  indicates  heavily  congested  flow  where  traffic  
demand  exceeds  capacity .Table 76. Traffic Volume to Capacity ratio and Level of Service 
250
Towards 
Begur road
Towards M.G 
Road
Towards 
Begur road
Towards M.G 
Road
Towards 
Begur road
Towards M.G 
Road
Towards 
Begur road
Towards M.G 
Road
Towards 
Begur road
Towards M.G 
Road
Towards 
Begur road
Towards M.G 
Road
Towards 
Begur road
Towards M.G 
Road
KH Road Junction 4 lane 2700 2700 2095 1562 0.78 0.58  LOS D LOS C 2095 1514 0.78 0.56  LOS D LOS C
Between Toll Gate Bus Stop 
and Adugodi Junction4 lane 2700 2700 3195 2837 1.18 1.05 LOS F LOS F 3241 2860 1.2 1.06 LOS F LOS F
Between Adugodi Junction 
and Ganapathi Temple Road 
Junction6 lane 4200 2520 3968 3810 0.94 1.51 LOS E LOS F 4030 3841 0.96 1.52 LOS E LOS F
Between Ganapathi Temple 
Road Junction and Madivala 
Check Post4 lane 2700 2700 3426 3861 1.27 1.43 LOS F LOS F 3528 3853 1.31 1.43 LOS F LOS F
Between  Madivala Check 
Post and St John's Hospital 
Junction6 lane 4200 4200 6327 3911 1.51 0.93 LOS F LOS E 6418 3904 1.53 0.93 LOS F LOS E
Between St John's Hospital 
Junction and Madivala 
Traffic Police Station 
Junction6 lane 2520 2520 4131 6981 1.64 2.77 LOS F LOS F 3909 7141 1.55 2.83 LOS F LOS F
Between Madivala Traffic 
Police Station Junction and 
Silk Board Junction6 lane 2520 2520 4131 5332 1.64 2.12 LOS F LOS F 3909 5161 1.55 2.05 LOS F LOS F
Between Silk Board and NH 
Skywalk8 Lanes 4080 4080 6233 3828 1.53 0.94 LOS F LOS E 5888 3770 1.44 0.92 LOS F LOS E
Between NH Skywalk and 
Begur Road Junction8 Lanes 4080 4080 3106 4666 0.76 1.14  LOS D LOS F 2913 4742 0.71 1.16 LOS C LOS FCapacity*Morning Peak Evening Peak
Morning 
Peak Hour 
Volume 
(PCUs)V/C RatioLevel of 
Service*Evening Peak 
Hour Volume 
(PCUs)V/C RatioLevel of 
Service*
Road Name
Typology of RoadHOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
286
251
Figure 263. V/C ratios for Morning  Peak  
Figure 264. V/C ratios for Evening Peak  HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
287
Traffic  Volume  at Junctions
The traffic  volumes  at intersections  help  in assessing  the traffic  volumes  at mid-block  locations  of the arms  of the intersection  which  together  with  journey  speed  and road  inventory  data  
aid in evaluating  the Level  of Service  (LOS)  of Urban  Arterials  and further,  the traffic  volumes  at mid-block  also establishes  the need  for safe pedestrian  crossing  facility  taking  into 
account  the pedestrian  crossing  volumes .  
Peak  Hour  Traffic  Volumes  are as shown  below  in Table  77.
Speed  and Delay
Speed  & delay  survey  provides  a link wise  estimate  of journey  time,  running  time  and delay . Speed  and Delay  Survey  was carried  out for Bus and Car separately  
during  morning  and evening  peak  hours . In case of Car Speed  and Delay  Survey,  floating  car technique  has been  utilized  for obtaining  data  wherein  the driver  is 
instructed  to follow  the designated  route  course,  while  maintaining  the average  speed  of other  traffic  and accompanied  by trained  members  of the team  who  record  
the cumulative  time  at specified  timing  points  to ensure  obtaining  the average  link travel  time  of the road  network . 
The overall  travel  speed  generally  referred  to as journey  speed  is the effective  speed  between  two points  and is computed  as the distance  divided  by the total  time  
taken  by the vehicle  to complete  the journey  including  delays  incurred  en-route . 
The direction -wise  abstract  on analysis  along  Hosur  Road  Corridor  furnishing  the name  of road,  length  surveyed,  journey  speed  and running  speed  is furnished  
below  from   table  98-100.Among  the 7 turning  volume  count  surveyed  locations,  Madivala  Traffic  Police  Junctions  found  to be having  the highest  peak  hour  volume  (9360  PCUs  during  morning  peak  and 9873  
PCUs  during  evening  peak)  followed  by Audugodi  Junction  with  6785  PCUs  during  morning  peak  and 8729  PCUs  during  evening  peak .
252
Vehicles PCUs Vehicles PCUs
1 Vellara Junction 8015 5270.7 10.15-11.15 8049 5223.8 19.15-20.15
2 Adugodi Junction 13081 8685.1 10.30-11.30 13091 8729.2 19.00-20.00
3Forum Mall 
Junction 
(Ganapathi 
Temple Road 
Junction) 11272 7568.5 10.45-11.45 11393 7660.5 19.30-20.30
4Madivala Check 
Post Junction12500 8502 11.00-12.00 12617 8563.1 19.15-20.15
5St.John's Hospital 
Junction9276 6612.6 9.00-10.00 9289 6435.9 17.45-18.45
6Madivala Traffic 
Police Junction13577 9360.3 9.45-10.45 15089 9873.4 17.30-18.30
7Begur Road 
Junction11308 8186.3 9.45-10.45 11322 8109 17.30-18.30Morning Peak Hour 
VolumeMorning  
Peak HourEvening Peak Hour Volume Evening Peak 
HourSl. No. Junction NameTable 77. Traffic Volume Counts at all the junctions along the corridor HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
288
Table 78. Bus Speed and Delay - Towards Begur (Morning Peak)
253
Length
(in Km)
1 One WayMayo Hall Junction 
(M.G.Road)Vellara Junction 1.3 154 452 298 10 16Signal delay and 
narrow 
carriageway width
2 Two Way Vellara Junction CMP Junction 0.91 115 304 189 11 17Metro Work under 
construction 
3 Two Way CMP JunctionBannerghatta 
Road Junction0.6 47 130 83 17 26 Traffic Flow Delay
4 Two WayBannerghatta Road 
JunctionGanapathi 
Temple Road 
Junction2.18 279 705 426 11 18Narrow road, traffic 
signal delay & 
Traffic flow delay
5 Two WayGanapathi Temple 
Road JunctionSt. Johns Hospital 
Junction0.61 0 129 129 17 17Signal Delay ad 
Traffic Flow Delay
6 One WaySt. Johns Hospital 
JunctionKrupanidhi 
College Junction1.61 303 710 407 8 14Construction works, 
Siganl Delays and 
Traffic flow delays
7 One WayKrupanidhi College 
JunctionMadiwala Traffic 
Police Station 
Junction0.99 17 147 130 24 27 Traffic lfow delay
8 Two WayMadiwala Traffic 
Police Station 
JunctionSilk Board 
Junction0.52 8 95 87 20 22On street parking, 
bad roads and 
traffic flow delays, 
Merging and 
diverging delays
9 Two Way Silk Board JunctionBegur Main Road 
Junction1.31 190 391 201 12 23Merging and 
Diverging delays, 
bus stoppage and 
traffic flow delays
14 20Running 
Time (Sec)Journey 
Speed 
(Kmph)Running 
Speed 
(Kmph)
AVERAGEReasons for Delay Sl.No.Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To NodeDelay 
(Sec)Journey 
Time (Sec)HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
289
Table 79 Bus Speed and Delay - Towards MG Road (Morning Peak)
254
S l.No.Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node T o NodeLength(i
n Km)Delay 
(S ec)Journey 
T ime (S ec)Running T ime 
(S ec)Journey 
S peed 
(Kmph)Running S peed 
(Kmph)Reasons for Delay
1 Two WayBegur Main Road 
JunctionSilk Board 
Junction1.31 114 505 391 9 12Metro under 
construction
2 Two Way Silk Board JunctionMadiwala Traffic 
Police Station 
Junction0.52 55 152 97 12 19Merging and 
Diverging Delays, 
bus stoppage at 
down ramp
3 One WayMadiwala Traffic 
Police Station 
JunctionSt. John’s 
Hospital Junction1.1 83 273 190 15 21Hevay traffic, Traffic  
 flow delay
4 Two WaySt. John’s Hospital 
JunctionGanapathi 
Temple Road 
Junction0.61 192 370 178 6 12White topping 
works, On street 
parking by autos 
near forum mall, 
signal delay
5 Two WayGanapathi Temple 
Road JunctionBannerghatta 
Road Junction2.18 142 457 315 17 25White topping 
works , traffic flow 
delays and signal 
delay
6 Two WayBannerghatta Road 
JunctionCMP Junction 0.6 179 313 134 7 16Narrow road width, 
signal delay and 
traffic flow delay
7 Two Way CMP Junction Vellara Junction 0.91 232 410 178 8 18Metro under 
construction
8 Two Way Vellara JunctionBrigade Road 
Junction0.26 0 45 45 21 21
9 One WayBrigade Road 
JunctionResidency Road 
Junction0.3 56 120 64 9 17Signal delay and 
traffic flow delay
12 18 AV E RAGEHOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
290
255Table 80. Bus Speed and Delay - Towards Begur(Evening Peak)
Journey 
Time 
(Sec)
1 One WayMayo Hall Junction 
(M.G.Road)Vellara Junction 1.3 115 392 277 12 17Signal delay and 
narrow 
carriageway width
2 Two Way Vellara Junction CMP Junction 0.91 48 158 110 21 30Metro Work under 
construction 
3 Two Way CMP JunctionBannerghatta 
Road Junction0.6 11 96 85 23 25 Traffic Flow Delay
4 Two WayBannerghatta Road 
JunctionGanapathi 
Temple Road 
Junction2.18 318 606 288 13 27Narrow road, traffic 
signal delay & 
Traffic flow delay
5 Two WayGanapathi Temple 
Road JunctionSt. John’s 
Hospital Junction0.61 0 175 175 13 13Signal Delay ad 
Traffic Flow Delay
6 One WaySt. John’s Hospital 
JunctionKrupanidhi 
College Junction1.61 191 597 406 10 14Construction works, 
Siganl Delays and 
Traffic flow delays
7 One WayKrupanidhi College 
JunctionMadiwala Traffic 
Police Station 
Junction0.99 33 225 192 16 19 Traffic lfow delay
8 Two WayMadiwala Traffic 
Police Station 
JunctionSilk Board 
Junction0.52 0 138 138 14 14
9 Two Way Silk Board JunctionBegur Main Road 
Junction1.31 237 598 361 8 13Merging and 
Diverging delays, 
bus stoppage and 
traffic flow delays
14 19Running 
Time (Sec)Journey 
Speed 
(Kmph)Running 
Speed 
(Kmph)
AVERAGEReasons for Delay Sl.No.Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To NodeLength 
(in Km)Delay 
(Sec)HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
291
256Table 81. Bus Speed and Delay - Towards MG Road(Evening Peak)
Sl.No.Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To Node LengthDelay 
(Sec)Journey 
Time (Sec)Running 
Time (Sec)Journey 
Speed 
(Kmph)
(in Km)
1 Two WayBegur Main Road 
JunctionSilk Board 
Junction1.31 21 312 291 15 16Metro under 
construction
2 Two Way Silk Board JunctionMadiwala Traffic 
Police Station 
Junction0.52 26 149 123 13 15Merging and 
Diverging Delays, 
bus stoppage at 
down ramp
3 One WayMadiwala Traffic 
Police Station 
JunctionSt. Johns Hospital 
Junction1.1 52 218 166 18 24Hevay traffic, Traffic  
 flow delay
4 Two WaySt. Johns Hospital 
JunctionGanapathi 
Temple Road 
Junction0.61 102 218 116 10 19White topping 
works, On street 
parking by autos 
near forum mall, 
signal delay
5 Two WayGanapathi Temple 
Road JunctionBannerghatta 
Road Junction2.18 43 327 284 24 28White topping 
works , traffic flow 
delays and signal 
delay
6 Two WayBannerghatta Road 
JunctionCMP Junction 0.6 118 281 163 8 13Narrow road width, 
signal delay and 
traffic flow delay
7 Two Way CMP Junction Vellara Junction 0.91 648 921 273 4 12Metro under 
construction, Signal 
Delay
8 Two Way Vellara JunctionBrigade Road 
Junction0.26 36 85 49 11 19 Traffic flow delay
9 One WayBrigade Road 
JunctionResidency Road 
Junction0.3 92 104 12 10 90Signal delay and 
traffic flow delay
13 25Running 
Speed 
(Kmph)
AVERAGEReasons for DelayHOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
292
It was observed  that the lower  journey  speeds  are mainly  due to traffic  congestion  and the delays  are mostly  occurring  at junctions . The 
Average  Bus Journey  Speed  is approximately  13 Kmph  during  morning  peak  hour  and 14 kmph  during  evening  peak  hour  as shown  in 
Figure  265.
257
Figure 265:Average Bus Speed and Delay (Morning Peak)HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
293
Figure 266:Average Bus Speed and Delay (Evening Peak)HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
294
Car speed and delay
Table 82. Car Speed and Delay - Towards Begur(Morning Peak)
259
Length
(in Km)
1 One Way Brigade road Shooley Circle 0.5 16 90 74 20 24 Traffic flow delay
2 Two Way Shoolay CircleVellara 
Junction0.3 13 35 22 31 49 Traffic flow delay
3 Two WayVellara 
JunctionCMP junction 1 65 142 77 25 47Metro works under 
construction
4 Two Way CMP junctionAnepalya 
Junction0.75 31 98 67 28 40 Narrow roads 
5 Two WayAnepalya 
JunctionAdugodi 
Junction1 156 245 89 15 40Bottleneck , white 
topping works 
6 Two WayAdugodi 
JunctionForum Mall 
junction1.25 50 176 126 26 36White topping works 
, signal dealys and 
traffic flow delay
7 Two WayForum Mall 
junctionSt Johns 
hospital 
junction0.75 65 135 70 20 39Signal delays and 
traffic flow delays
8 Two WaySt Johns 
hospital 
junctionSilk Board 1.5 67 245 178 22 30Signal delays and 
traffic flow delays
9 Two Way Silk BoardBegur 
Junction1.55 43 185 142 30 39Signal delays and 
traffic flow delays
24 38Reasons for Delay Delay (Sec)Journey Time 
(Sec)Running Time 
(Sec)Journey 
Speed 
(Kmph)Running 
Speed 
(Kmph)
AVERAGESl.No.Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To NodeHOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
295
Car speed and delay
260Table 83. Car Speed and Delay - Towards MG Road(Morning Peak)
Length
(in Km)
1 Two WayBegur 
JunctionSilk Board 1.55 33 179 146 31 18Merging and  
diverging at flyover 
2 Two Way Silk BoardSt Johns 
hospital 
junction1.5 76 204 128 26 28Merging and  
diverging at flyover 
and bus stop at the 
down ramp 
3 Two WaySt Johns 
hospital 
junctionForum Mall 
junction0.75 39 147 108 18 42Signal delay and 
traffic flow delay
4 Two WayForum Mall 
junctionAdugodi 
Junction1.25 50 161 111 28 24White topping  
works, signal delays
5 Two WayAdugodi 
JunctionAnepalya 
Junction1 57 195 138 18 39White topping works 
, narrow road
6 Two WayAnepalya 
JunctionCMP junction 0.75 21 110 89 25 63Signal delay and 
traffic flow delay
7 Two Way CMP junctionVellara 
Junction1 75 156 81 23 56Metro work 
construction
8 Two WayVellara 
JunctionMuseum road 
junction0.7 27 91 64 28 42
25 36Reasons for Delay Sl.No.Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To Node Delay (Sec)Journey Time 
(Sec)Running Time 
(Sec)Journey 
Speed 
(Kmph)Running 
Speed 
(Kmph)
AV E RAGEHOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
296
Car speed and delay
261Table 84. Car Speed and Delay - Towards Begur (Evening Peak)
S l.No.Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node T o Node Length(in Km) Delay (S ec)Journey T ime 
(S ec)Running T ime 
(S ec)Journey S peed 
(Kmph)Running S peed 
(Kmph)Reasons for Delay 
1 One Way Brigade road Shooley Circle 0.5 23 91 68 20 26 Traffic flow delay
2 Two Way Shooley CircleVellara 
Junction0.3 20 58 38 19 28 Traffic flow delay
3 Two WayVellara 
JunctionCMP junction 1 79 153 74 24 49Metro works under 
construction
4 Two Way CMP junctionAnepalya 
Junction0.75 43 114 71 24 38 Narrow roads 
5 Two WayAnepalya 
JunctionAdugodi 
Junction1 178 259 81 14 44Bottleneck , white 
topping works 
6 Two WayAdugodi 
JunctionForum Mall 
junction1.25 62 196 134 23 34White topping works 
, signal dealys and 
traffic flow delay
7 Two WayForum Mall 
junctionSt Johns 
hospital 
junction0.75 74 156 82 17 33Signal delays and 
traffic flow delays
8 Two WaySt Johns 
hospital 
junctionSilk Board 1.5 82 285 203 19 27Signal delays and 
traffic flow delays
9 Two Way Silk BoardBegur 
Junction1.55 59 203 144 27 39Signal delays and 
traffic flow delays
21 35 AV E RAGEHOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
297
Car speed and delay
262Table 85. Car Speed and Delay - Towards Begur (Evening Peak)
Sl.No.Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To Node Length(in Km) Delay (Sec)Journey Time 
(Sec)Running Time 
(Sec)Journey 
Speed 
(Kmph)Running 
Speed 
(Kmph)Resons for the Delay 
1 Two WayBegur 
JunctionSilk Board 1.55 52 193 141 29 19Merging and  
diverging at flyover 
2 Two Way Silk BoardSt Johns 
hospital 
junction1.5 97 229 132 24 27Merging and  
diverging at flyover 
and bus stop at the 
down ramp 
3 Two WaySt Johns 
hospital 
junctionForum Mall 
junction0.75 23 123 100 22 45Signal delay and traffic 
flow delay
4 Two WayForum Mall 
junctionAdugodi 
Junction1.25 78 185 107 24 25White topping  works, 
signal delays
5 Two WayAdugodi 
JunctionAnepalya 
Junction1 52 193 141 19 38White topping works , 
narrow road
6 Two WayAnepalya 
JunctionCMP junction 0.75 36 139 103 19 26Signal delay and traffic 
flow delay
7 Two Way CMP junctionVellara 
Junction1 63 163 100 22 45Metro work 
construction
8 Two WayVellara 
JunctionMuseum road 
junction0.7 37 103 66 24 41Signal delay and traffic 
flow delay
23 30 AVERAGEHOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
298
The Average Car Journey Speed is approximately 24Kmph during morning peak hour and 22 Kmph during evening peak hour.
Figure 267 :Average Car Speed and Delay (Morning Peak)
263HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
299
The Average Car Journey Speed is approximately 22Kmph during morning peak hour and 22 Kmph during evening peak hour.
Figure 268:Average Car Speed and Delay (Evening  Peak)
264
HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
300
Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanRoad  Inventory  Details  
The road  network  inventory  has been  carried  out to identify  the characteristics  of the road  network  along  Hosur  Road  Corridor . The 
characteristics  of the road  network  include  the width  of the roadway,  divided  or undivided,  existence  of on street  parking,  any traffic  
management  system  like one way  etc. Features  of various  road  stretches  are presented  in Table  86.
Link No Name 
of 
RoadLocation Carriageway Width Road type 
LHS Width Median RHS 
Width
1 Hosur 
Road Shoolay Circle towards 
Residency Road 11 0.5 11 Bituminous
2 Shoolay Circle Towards 
John Son Market10 0.5 10.5 Bituminous
3 Shoolay Circle Towards 
Richmond circle 15 One way - Bituminous
4 Shoolay Circle Towards 
D'Souza circle15 One way - Bituminous
5 Near Baldwin Methodist 
College7 0.5 11.5 Bituminous
6 Near  CMP Junction 5 0.5 5 Bituminous
7 Near  Anepalya 10.3 0.5 8.6 8.6
8 Near St John's Hospital 
Skywalk36 One way Concrete
9 Near Market Square 21 One way Bituminous
10 Near Madiwala Police 
Station14 1 14 Bituminous
12 NH after Silk Board 
Junction including service 
road20 2.5 20 BituminousTable 86 Road Network Inventory Details
278HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
301
Comprehensive Traffic Management 
Plan
279
 Figure 269. Road InventoryHOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
302
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
280
Figure  270. Road InventoryHOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
303
Comprehensive Traffic Management 
Plan
Figure  271. Road Inventory281
HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
304
Comprehensive Traffic Management 
Plan
282
Figure  272. Road InventoryHOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
305
The site which is under construction for Metro Station on the narrow road stretch from Shooley Junction  to Johnson Market is  causing a lot of 
inconvenience to the people besides causing frequent traffic jams. Figure 273.
The road stretch along the corridor is below par. Though the traffic has increased manifolds over the years,  the road remain s to be the same. 
The road users on this stretch and the residents living along this stretch of roadway are greatly inconvenienced due to the c ongestion, 
especially during the peak hours.
`✓Since  the site is under  construction,  it is 
considered  as temporary  condition,  but to 
handle  the current  situation  the signal  
timings  of the Johnson  market  intersection  
need  to be optimized  and extra  phase  for 
the through  traffic  need  to be provided .
✓Usually  it is seen  that at the road  side 
construction  site, the debris  is dumped  on 
the footpath  and pedestrians  are forced  to 
walk  on the carriageway  thus  resulting  in 
conflicts  with  vehicles . Therefore,  all the 
debris  from  the footpaths  need  to be 
removed  for safe Pedestrian  access .
Figure 273. Issues near Shooley junction1. Congestion due to Narrow Road Width near Shooley Junction 
Recommendations:
285Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
Benefits:
Congestion  due to construction  activity  
can be reduced  by signal  optimization .
Pedestrian - Vehicular  conflicts  can be 
reduced  by improving  footpath  and 
removing  the construction  debris  from  
the footpath .HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
306
 Congestion due to Narrow Road width from  Johnson Market junction to Hotel Mint Propus.
`The narrow  road  stretch  from  
Johnson  Market  to Baldwin  
Methodist  College  School  is causing  a 
lot of inconvenience  to the people  
besides  causing  frequent  traffic  jams  
especially  during  the time  when  the 
college  is let off in the evening . 
The road  stretch  along  the corridor  is 
below  par. Though  the traffic  has 
increased  manifolds  over  the years,  
the road  remains  to be the same .
The road users on this stretch and the 
residents living along this stretch of 
roadway are adversely affected by the 
congestion,
especially during the peak hours.
From  the surveys,  it is observed  that 
maximum  traffic  congestion  is from  
Johnson  Market  till the Hotel  Mint  
Propus . The carriage  way width  here  
reduces  from  21 meters  to 10.5 meters  
thus  choking  the entire  road,  which  is 
one of the main  reasons  for 
congestion . Figure  274.
Figure 274. Issues near Johnson market junction
286Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
307
``Recommendations:
✓The solution  is to widen  up this stretch  of road  to ease out the traffic  congestion . This  is a very  critical  spot  on the entire  corridor  where  the road  width  is 21 
meter  on one side and 10.5 meters  on the other  side. The entire  land  on the LHS  belongs  to defence/  army,  which  needs  to be acquired . Minimum  land  required  is 
11meters  in width  as the RHS  has crematoriums,  Colleges,  residential  land  use and worship  places . 
✓Total  land  required  from  the defence  area is 950 meters  in length  and 11 meters  in width,  which  is approximately  10,000 sq meters  of land  as shown  in the Figure  
275
✓Footpath  need  to be developed  along  the corridor  especially  near  the Baldwin  Methodist  College  and the Johnson  Market  area where  the pedestrian  activity  is 
maximum .
✓Once  the road  widening  is done,  Signal  Optimization  need  to be done  for all the signals  along  the corridor .
Benefits:
➢Congestion  due narrow  road  /bottleneck  can be reduced,  as symmetry  along  the road  widths  will be achieved  all along  the corridor  .i.e. 
21meters .
➢Signal  optimization  will help  in setting  right  signal  phase  timings  based  on the traffic  flow . Figure 275 Land required from defence area
287HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
308
``Congestion due to sudden reduction in road width at Anepalya Road
Sudden  change  in road  widths  is resulting  in traffic  congestion  near  Anepalya  Main  road  diversion . The road  width  reduces  from  21 meters  to 11 
meters  for a length  of 250 meters  till the bridge  on the drain . Once  the bridge  is crossed,  the road  width  widens  to 21 meters .  The narrow  road  
stretch  from  Anepalya  main  road  to Bridge/  Drain  is causing  a lot of inconvenience  to the people  besides  causing  frequent  traffic  jams  especially  
during  the peak  hours . 
The road  stretch  along  the corridor  is below  par. Though  the traffic  has increased  manifolds  over  the years,  the road  width  remains  to be the same . 
The presence  of burial  ground  on the RHS  and residential  colony  at LHS  has limited  the scope  for road  widening . Figure  276.
Figure 276. Issues near 
Anepalya main road
288
HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
309
``
Figure 277 Issues near Anepalya main road
Recommendations:
✓The solution  is to widen  up this stretch  of road  to ease  out the traffic  congestion . This  is 
one of the critical  spots  on the corridor  ,where  the road  width  is 21 meter  on one side and 
10.5 meters  on the other  side. 
✓The entire  land  use on the LHS  is residential,  and a small  portion  of it needs  to be 
acquired . Minimum  land  required  on LHS  varies  from  5.5 meter  to 11meters  in width . 
The place  where  residential  land  use is on either  side,  the land  should  be acquired  for 
10.5 meters  from  the centre  line on both  the sides  and the place  were  burial  ground  is 
there  the land  should  be acquired  on the LHS  for 10.5 meters . 
✓Approximate  land  required  for acquisition  is 2,500 Square  meters .
✓Footpath  need  to be developed  along  this stretch  and the debris  and garbage  need  to be 
removed  from  the footpaths .
Benefits:
➢Congestion  due narrow  road  /bottleneck  can be reduced,  as symmetry  along  the 
road  widths  will be achieved  all along  the corridor  .i.e. 21meters .4. Road Safety Issue at the Pedestrian Skywalk Bus Bay 
between Silk Board and the Begur Junction
As per the site condition,  there  exists  a bus bay and a pedestrian  skywalk  at the mid-
block  of Silk Board  Junction  and the Begur  Junction . However,  the issue  here  is the 
enforcement . The Interstate  and the intra  state  buses  - both  KSRTC,  BMTC  and private  
buses  do not stop  at the bus bay and instead  park  the buses  parallel  to each  other  on 
the main  carriageway . This  is resulting  in traffic  congestions,  queuing  and accidents  
figure 303.
Figure 278 Issues Between silk board and the Begur junction
Recommendations:
✓Existing  bus bay should  be made  to use by enforcement  through  BMTC  and 
Traffic  Police  for better  functioning . 
Benefits:
✓Congestion  and queuing  occurring  due to haphazard  bus stopping  can be 
eliminated  and maximum  road  safety  can be achieved .289HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
310
``Congestion due to ‘U ‘Turn at Begur Junction.
It is observed  that the current  situation  at Begur  
junction  is getting  out of control  and regular  traffic  
jams  are occurring  due to the buses  and other  
vehicles,  which  are taking  ‘U’ turn at the junction  
.i.e. vehicles  coming  from  Silk Board  side and 
taking  ‘U’ turn  towards  Silk Board,  are causing  
traffic  congestions  regularly .
Recommendations:
✓To overcome  the issue  of ‘U’ turn  at the junction  
which  is resulting  in traffic  congestions  and 
sometimes  accidents,  a separate  lane of 5.5 meters  
can be created  below  the flyover  about  30 meters  
before  the junction .
✓Once  the ‘U’ turn  is created,  signal  optimization  
need  to be done  for getting  right  signal  phasing . 
figure  279-280
Figure 280. Proposal to over come the issues
290
Benefits:
➢Congestion  occurring  due to ‘U-turn  at the junction  will get eliminated  thus  reducing  unwanted  traffic  congestions  occurring  at the junction .Figure 279. Proposal to over come the issuesHOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
311
PART D
SUMMARY AND IMPACT OF 
MEASURESS
312
Table 87 Comparison chart between existing scenario and proposed scenario - Morning Peak 
165The comparison  between  existing  operational  scenario  and the operational  scenario  after  implementing  the interventions  discussed  in the 
previous  chapter  along  Hosur  Road  Corridor  is tabulated . As discussed  in Chapter  6 (Survey  Analysis)  due to kerb  side bus stops  the effective  
road  available  for movement  of other  vehicles  in the traffic  stream  reduces  resulting  in the capacity  reduction  at few locations  along  the study  
corridor . From  Table  87 it can be seen  that with  the implementation  of the interventions  there  will be considerable  reduction  in Volume  to 
Capacity  Ratio  (V/C  Ratio),  enhanced  Level  of Service  and increased  Journey  Speed  along  Hosur  Road  Corridor . 
Towards 
Begur 
roadTowards 
M.G 
RoadTowards 
Begur 
roadTowards 
M.G 
RoadTowards 
Begur 
roadTowards 
M.G 
RoadTowards 
Begur 
roadTowards 
M.G 
RoadTowards 
Begur 
roadTowards 
M.G 
RoadTowards 
Begur 
roadTowards 
M.G 
Road
1 4 lane Between Vellara Junction and Toll 
Gate Bus Stop2700 2700 2095 1562 0.78 0.58  LOS D LOS C 11 8 15 16
2 4 lane Between Toll Gate Bus Stop and 
Adugodi Junction2700 2700 3195 2837 1.18 1.05 LOS F LOS F 17 7 17 17
3 6 lane Between Adugodi Junction and 
Ganapathi Temple Road Junction4200 2520 3968 3810 0.94 1.51 LOS E LOS F 11 17 16 14
4 4 lane Between Ganapathi Temple Road 
Junction and Madivala Check Post2700 2700 3426 3861 1.27 1.43 LOS F LOS F 17 6 17 18
5 6 lane Between  Madivala Check Post 
and St John's Hospital Junction4200 4200 6327 3911 1.51 0.93 LOS F LOS E 17 15 17 18
6 6 lane Between St John's Hospital Junction 
and Madivala Traffic Police Station 
Junction 2520 2520 4131 6981 1.64 2.77 LOS F LOS F 8 15 15 17
7 6 lane Between Madivala Traffic Police 
Station Junction and Silk Board 
Junction2520 2520 4131 5332 1.64 2.12 LOS F LOS F 15 12 15 17
8 8 Lanes Between Silk Board and NH Skywalk 4080 4080 6233.38 3828.06 1.53 0.94 LOS F LOS E 12 9 18 16
9 8 LanesBetween NH Skywalk and Begur 
Road Junction4080 4080 3105.94 4665.82 0.76 1.14  LOS D LOS F 12 9 18 16Sl. No.Typology of 
RoadRoad Name EXISTING 
CapacityMorning Peak Hour 
Volume (PCUs)V/C Ratio-Morning 
PeakLevel of Service-
Morning PeakBus Journey Speed 
(Kmph)-Morning 
Peak Car Journey Speed 
(Kmph)-Morning 
Peak
302HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
313
Towards 
Begur 
roadTowards 
M.G 
RoadTowards 
Begur 
roadTowards 
M.G 
RoadTowards 
Begur 
roadTowards 
M.G 
RoadTowards 
Begur 
roadTowards 
M.G 
Road
1 4 lane Between Vellara Junction and Toll 
Gate Bus Stop2700 2700 0.78 0.58  LOS D LOS C 25 30
2 4 lane Between Toll Gate Bus Stop and 
Adugodi Junction2700 2700 1.18 1.05 LOS F LOS F 15 15
3 6 lane Between Adugodi Junction and 
Ganapathi Temple Road Junction4200 4200 0.94 0.91 LOS E LOS E 25 25
4 4 lane Between Ganapathi Temple Road 
Junction and Madivala Check Post2700 2700 1.27 1.43 LOS F LOS F 15 15
5 6 lane Between  Madivala Check Post 
and St John's Hospital Junction2700 2700 2.34 1.45 LOS F LOS F 15 15
6 6 lane Between St John's Hospital Junction 
and Madivala Traffic Police Station 
Junction 4200 4200 0.98 1.66 LOS E LOS F 25 15
7 6 lane Between Madivala Traffic Police 
Station Junction and Silk Board 
Junction4200 4200 0.98 1.27 LOS E LOS F 25 15
8 8 Lanes Between Silk Board and NH Skywalk 6800 6800 0.92 0.56 LOS E LOS C 30 30
9 8 LanesBetween NH Skywalk and Begur 
Road Junction6800 6800 0.46 0.69 LOS C LOS C 30 30Sl. No.Typology of 
RoadRoad Name WITH IMPROVEMENTS
CapacityV/C Ratio-Morning 
PeakLevel of Service-
Morning PeakAnticipated Speed 
(Kmph) as per 
HCM-Morning PeakTable 88. Comparison chart between existing scenario and proposed scenario
303HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
314
Towards 
Begur 
roadTowards 
M.G RoadTowards 
Begur roadTowards 
M.G RoadTowards 
Begur roadTowards M.G 
RoadTowards 
Begur roadTowards 
M.G RoadTowards 
Begur 
roadTowards 
M.G RoadTowards 
Begur 
roadTowards 
M.G Road
1 4 lane Between Vellara Junction and Toll 
Gate Bus Stop2700 2700 2095 1514 0.78 0.56  LOS D LOS C 13 4 13 17
2 4 lane Between Toll Gate Bus Stop and 
Adugodi Junction2700 2700 3241 2860 1.20 1.06 LOS F LOS F 12 8 17 16
3 6 lane Between Adugodi Junction and 
Ganapathi Temple Road Junction4200 2520 4030 3841 0.96 1.52 LOS E LOS F 13 15 16 18
4 4 lane Between Ganapathi Temple Road 
Junction and Madivala Check Post2700 2700 3528 3853 1.31 1.43 LOS F LOS F 13 10 15 18
5 6 lane Between  Madivala Check Post 
and St John's Hospital Junction4200 4200 6418 3904 1.53 0.93 LOS F LOS E 13 10 15 17
6 6 lane Between St John's Hospital Junction 
and Madivala Traffic Police Station 
Junction 2520 2520 3909 7141 1.55 2.83 LOS F LOS F 10 15 13 17
7 6 lane Between Madivala Traffic Police 
Station Junction and Silk Board 
Junction2520 2520 3909 5161 1.55 2.05 LOS F LOS F 14 13 16 16
8 8 Lanes Between Silk Board and NH Skywalk 4080 4080 5888 3770 1.44 0.92 LOS F LOS E 8 15 18 18
9 8 LanesBetween NH Skywalk and Begur 
Road Junction4080 4080 2913 4742 0.71 1.16 LOS C LOS F 8 15 18 18Sl. No.Typology of 
RoadRoad Name EXISTING 
CapacityEvening Peak Hour 
Volume (PCUs)V/C Ratio-Evening PeakLevel of Service-
Evening PeakBus Journey Speed 
(Kmph)-Evening Peak Car Journey Speed 
(Kmph)-Evening PeakTable 89. Comparison chart between existing scenario and proposed scenario – Evening Peak 
304HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
315
Towards 
Begur 
roadTowards 
M.G RoadTowards 
Begur 
roadTowards 
M.G RoadTowards 
Begur 
roadTowards 
M.G RoadTowards 
Begur 
roadTowards 
M.G Road
1 4 lane Between Vellara Junction and Toll 
Gate Bus Stop2700 2700 0.78 0.56  LOS D LOS C 25 30
2 4 lane Between Toll Gate Bus Stop and 
Adugodi Junction2700 2700 1.20 1.06 LOS F LOS F 15 15
3 6 lane Between Adugodi Junction and 
Ganapathi Temple Road Junction4200 4200 0.96 0.91 LOS E LOS E 25 25
4 4 lane Between Ganapathi Temple Road 
Junction and Madivala Check Post2700 2700 1.31 1.43 LOS F LOS F 15 15
5 6 lane Between  Madivala Check Post 
and St John's Hospital Junction2700 2700 2.38 1.45 LOS F LOS F 15 15
6 6 lane Between St John's Hospital Junction 
and Madivala Traffic Police Station 
Junction 4200 4200 0.93 1.70 LOS E LOS F 25 15
7 6 lane Between Madivala Traffic Police 
Station Junction and Silk Board 
Junction4200 4200 0.93 1.23 LOS E LOS F 25 15
8 8 Lanes Between Silk Board and NH Skywalk 6800 6800 0.87 0.55 LOS E LOS C 25 30
9 8 LanesBetween NH Skywalk and Begur 
Road Junction6800 6800 0.43 0.70  LOS B LOS C 40 30Sl. No.Typology of 
RoadRoad Name WITH IMPROVEMENTS
CapacityV/C Ratio-Evening 
PeakLevel of Service-
Evening PeakAnticipated Speed 
(Kmph) as per HCM-
Evening Peak305Table 90. Comparison chart between existing scenario and proposed scenarioHOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
316
K.R.PuramYeshwanthapura
Madiwala  UnderpassCORRIDOR
 08
Hosur Road -
Extension of 
Madiwala  
Underpass
Extension  of 
Existing  Madiwala  
underpass  till 
Traffic  police  
station  junction
``Madiwala Underpass Extension
290he Madiwala  underpass,  constructed  in 2010  to alleviate  traffic  
congestion  at Madiwala  junction,  has successfully  served  its purpose  
over  the years . However,  the current  traffic  situation  has significantly  
worsened,  with  the underpass  now  overburdened  due to the increasing  
volume  of vehicles . The primary  cause  of this issue  is the nearby  three -
arm intersection,  located  just 200 meters  away . Traffic  from  Silk Board  
turning  right  at this intersection  exacerbates  the congestion  on Hosur  
Road,  where  traffic  jams  often  extend  for nearly  1 km, resulting  in a 45-
minute  commute  from  Madiwala  check  post  to Silk Board .
To address  these  challenges,  there  are plans  to construct  a North -South  
Tunnel  from  Hebbal  to Silk Board,  with  one of its entry  and exit points  
on Hosur  Road  near  Madiwala . Additionally,  the elevated  corridors  
from  Anepalya  to Silk Board  and from  Silk Board  to Old Madras  Road  
are also set to be built  in the area. Given  these  developments,  it is crucial  
to design  Hosur  Road  for maximum  accessibility  and smooth  traffic  
flow . At the same  time,  the surface -level  traffic  must  remain  undisturbed  
and congestion -free.
In response  to this, a proposal  has been  made  to extend  the existing  
Madiwala  underpass  up to the Madiwala  Police  Station  Junction,  using  
an open -cut-and-cover  system . This  approach  would  allow  full right -of-
way  (ROW)  for surface  traffic  from  Madiwala  to the police  station  
junction,  greatly  benefiting  traffic  flow  on the ground  level . The 
proposal,  as depicted  in the accompanying  images,  outlines  how  this 
extension  can help  mitigate  current  traffic  bottlenecks .
    
  
HOSUR ROAD - Madiwala Underpass
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
Figure 281 Madiwala underpass
318
``Decongestion Plan from Madiwala Check post to Silk board
290Entry to Tunnel 
towards HebbalExit from Tunnel 
towards Silk BoardUp ramp & Down 
Ramp from 
Anaepalya  
Elevated corridorElevated corridor 
connecting Old 
Madras road to 
Silk Board junction
Existing Madiwala 
UnderpassProposed Extension of 
Madiwala UnderpassSilk board 
JunctionMadiwala Traffic 
Police Station
Figure 282. Decongestion Plan from Madiwala Check post to Silk boardHOSUR ROAD - Madiwala Underpass
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
319
``Traffic Congestion  Scenario from Madiwala Check post to Silk Board
290
Traffic Queues observed from Madiwala Underpass to 
Madiwala Police station Junction
Traffic Queues observed from Silk Board Junction to 
Madiwala Police station JunctionMadiwala Traffic 
Police Station
Silk board 
JunctionExisting Madiwala 
Underpasst any time  of day,  traffic  congestion  is consistently  observed  at Madiwala,  primarily  due to the right -turning  traffic  coming  from  Silk Board . 
Previously,  this right  turn  was restricted,  allowing  traffic  to flow  straight  through,  but this resulted  in increased  congestion  at Madiwala  
check  post  and Sarjapur  Road . To alleviate  the density,  the right  turn  was permitted ; however,  this has led to heavy  traffic  buildup  
extending  back  to Madiwala  check  post,  especially  during  peak  hours .A permanent  solution  is now  needed  to ensure  seamless  traffic  flow . 
It is proposed  that the existing  underpass  be extended  beyond  the Madiwala  Traffic  Police  Station  junction,  with  an up ramp  introduced  
100 meters  before  Silk Board . This  modification  would  accommodate  traffic  heading  towards  HSR  and BTM  Layout  at grade,  while  
ensuring  uninterrupted  access  to Hosur  Road  and Electronic  City .
Figure 283.. Traffic Scenario at MadiwalaHOSUR ROAD - Madiwala Underpass
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
320
Existing 
Madiwala 
UnderpassSilk board 
Junction
100 Meter
600 Meter ``Proposed Extension of Underpass with Cut & Cover Method
290At any time  of day,  traffic  congestion  is consistently  observed  at Madiwala,  
primarily  due to the right -turning  traffic  coming  from  Silk Board . Previously,  
this right  turn  was restricted,  allowing  traffic  to flow  straight  through,  but 
this resulted  in increased  congestion  at Madiwala  check  post  and Sarjapur  
Road . To alleviate  the density,  the right  turn  was permitted ; however,  this 
has led to heavy  traffic  buildup  extending  back  to Madiwala  check  post,  
especially  during  peak  hours .A permanent  solution  is now  needed  to ensure  
seamless  traffic  flow . It is proposed  that the existing  underpass  be extended  
beyond  the Madiwala  Traffic  Police  Station  junction,  with  an up ramp  
introduced  100 meters  before  Silk Board . This  modification  would  
accommodate  traffic  heading  towards  HSR  and BTM  Layout  at grade,  while  
ensuring  uninterrupted  access  to Hosur  Road  and Electronic  City .
Figure 284. Proposed Madiwala Extension plan to decongest the trafficHOSUR ROAD - Madiwala Underpass
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
321
Figure 285. Proposed cross section for 4 lane Vehicle underpass at Madiwala Proposed Typical  Cross section for the 4 lane divided  Vehicular Under pass
HOSUR ROAD - Madiwala Underpass
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
322

K.R.PuramYeshwanthapura
CORRIDOR
 08
Hosur Road
Elevated Corridor 
from Hosur Road 
from Shoolay circle 
– Vellara junction -
Anepalya Junction -
Adugodi  Junction -
Forum junction -
St.John  Chruch  
junction -Madiwala 
junction -Silk board 
Junction
``
290Proposed Elevated Corridor from Shoolay Circle to Madiwala Check post
Hosur  Road  is a major  radial  road  serving  interstate  traffic,  but it is 
also one of the most  congested  routes  in Bengaluru . Key junctions  
along  this road,  including  Vellar , Anepalya , Adugodi , Forum  Mall,  
and Madiwala  junctions,  face severe  traffic  bottlenecks,  particularly  
during  peak  hours . The average  speed  of vehicles  is less than  15 
km/h  due to narrow  stretches  and ongoing  metro  construction,  
which  further  worsens  traffic  jams .
To alleviate  this congestion,  an elevated  corridor  has been  proposed  
from  Shoolay  Circle  to Madiwala  Check  Post . This  will bypass  
seven  minor  and major  junctions,  significantly  improving  travel  
speeds  and reducing  travel  times . With  other  major  infrastructure  
projects  planned  near  Silk Board,  such  as tunnel  roads,  
underpasses,  and elevated  roads  connecting  to Old Madras  Road,  
this elevated  corridor  will be a key solution  for traffic  flowing  from  
central  Bengaluru  toward  Silk Board .
The plan  includes  an up ramp  after  Brigade  Road  with  a down  
ramp  at Museum  Road . Another  up ramp  and down  ramp  are 
planned  near  Anepalya  and Adugodi  junctions ."
Madiwala 
Check postShoolay Circle
Anaepalya
Adugodi
KoramangalaProposed 
Elevated 
CorridorHOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
Figure 286 Plan of proposed elevated corridor from Shoolay 
circle to Madiwala Check post324
HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanProposed Elevated Corridor from Shoolay Circle to Madiwala Check post location of Ramps
Figure 287. Site Inspection photos of proposed Elevated corridor on Hosur road
Vellara 
Junction
Up Ramp at Brigade RoadDown ramp at Museum 
road
The proposed  corridor  
begins  just past the Opera  
House  Junction  at the end 
of Brigade  Road,  featuring  
a one-way  ramp  heading  
toward  Silk Board ..The proposed  corridor  
ends  just past the shoolay  
circle  on the museum  
road . Its a a one-way 
ramp  heading  towards  
Residency  road .The proposed  corridor  
passes  one of the busiest   
Vellara  junction .
325
HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanProposed Elevated Corridor from Shoolay Circle to Madiwala Check post location of Ramps
Johnson MarketAnaepalya  
Figure 288. Site Inspection photos of proposed Elevated corridor on Hosur roadAnaepalya  
The proposed  corridor  
passes  the narrow  stretch  
of Anepalya  area .
The proposed  corridor  
passes  the narrow  stretch  
of Anepalya  area. Near  
Johnson  market .
The proposed  corridor  
passes  the narrow  stretch  
of Anepalya  area. Near  
Johnson  market  where  
underground  Metro  is 
designed/
326
HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanProposed Elevated Corridor from Shoolay Circle to Madiwala Check post location of Ramps
Figure 289. Site Inspection photos of proposed Elevated corridor on Hosur road
Near Dairy
Madiwala Check post
The proposed  corridor  
passes  the Madiwala  
check  post  junction  and 
terminates  before  
Madiwala  underpass .
The proposed  corridor  
passes  on the Hosur  road  
near  police  quarters .
Additional  Up ramp  and a 
down  ramp  is proposed  
near  Adugodi  junction .
327
Figure 290. Proposed cross section for the Elevated corridor from Shoolay Circle to Silk board on Hosur road 
Proposed cross 4 lane undivided  Elevated corridor from Shoolay Circle to Silk board on Hosur road HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
328
Figure 291. Proposed cross section for  Elevated corridor from  Shoolay Circle to Silk board on Hosur road 
Proposed cross 6 lane undivided  Elevated corridor from Shoolay Circle to Silk board on Hosur road HOSUR ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
329
NayandahalliSirsi Circle
Proposed  
Continuation  of 
Ananda  Rao Circle  
flyover  up to K.R. 
Circle  towards  
Nrupatunga  roadCORRIDOR
 09
Mysuru Road 
Proposed  Elevated  
corridor  from  Sirsi  
Circle  to 
Nayandahalli  on 
Mysuru  road
Figure 292. Mysore Road CorridorThe seventh  corridor  to be undertaken  for the corridor  improvement  study  is the Mysore  Road  Corridor . The corridor  starts  from  Hudson  
Circle  and ends  at Nayandahalli  Circle  (on Outer  Ring  Road),  traversing  via K.R. Market . Figure  292.
The corridor  starts  from  Hudson  Circle  and ends  at Nayandahalli  Circle  (on Outer  Ring  Road) . It is one of the busiest  radial  roads  on the South  
– Western  side of the city leading  towards  Mysore .
Some  of the main  features  of the corridor  are:
•The lane configuration  on this corridor  is varying  from  four  lane divided  to six lane divided  two way .
•Length  of the study  corridor  is 7km.
•The road  surface  is varying  from  bituminous  to concrete .
•There  are nine  major  signalized  junctions  along  the corridor .
•Metro  Rail run on this corridor  operates  from  Deepanjali  nagar  to Nayandahalli  interchange .
Landmarks,  Attraction   & Production  Centers
The corridor  attracts  many  work  trips  due to the presence  of  commercial  activities,  small -scale  industries,  wholesale  steel  and hardware  market,  
wholesale  timber  market,  wholesale  agricultural  market  and wholesale  grain  market . Since  the road  network  around  the corridor  is well  established  
and being  the gate way  entry  for the traffic  coming  from  Mysore  and vice-versa  the trip attraction  rate on the corridor  is higher . shown  in Figure  
394Corridor VII : Mysore Road Corridor (Hudson Circle to Nayandahalli Interchange)
MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
331
The salient  features  of the corridor  are:
•The corridor  starts  from  one of the biggest  wholesale  markets  for agricultural  products,  which  attracts  large  number  of business  trips .
•The corridor  also has one of the city’s  biggest  markets  for computer  products,  electronics,  agricultural  equipment,  machine  and tools,  that includes  hardware,  
aluminum  and steel .
•The corridor   has one of the oldest  and largest  Government  hospitals  in Bangalore  -Victoria  Hospital  that was established  in the year  1901 . 
•The Corridor  has prominent  land  mark  heritage  buildings  like BBMP  office,  LIC Building,  Unity  Building,  Town  Hall,  K.R. Market  etc.
Figure 293. Landmarks, Attraction and 
production centres
K R Market
Victoria hospital
Town hallCanara bank
BBMP Head officeLIC Office
Major  Bus Stops  along  the Corridor
There  are twenty -one bus stops  located  on each  side of the corridor,  starting  from  Hudson  Circle  to Nayandahalli  Junction .. Bus bays  are not designed  for any of the bus stops  along  the 
corridor . This  has resulted  in the buses  getting  stopped  on the carriageway,  leading  to traffic  jams  and congestions . All the Bus Stop  locations  are as shown  in the Figure  294.
Figure 294. Major Bus 
Stands/Bus stopsMYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
Corridor  Characteristics
Entire  corridor  from  Hudson  Circle  to Nayandahalli  junction  varies  from  four  lane divided  two way  to six lane divided  two-way 
carriageway  with  footpaths  on either  side. Bangalore’s  first longest  elevated  flyover  was built  on this corridor  starting  from  Silver  Jubilee  
Park  on Narasimha  Raja  Road near  K.R.Market  to SirsiCircle,  which  is a four lane two way , divided  flyover  with  the length  of 2.65 km 
Figure  295.
Figure 295. Major Junctions along the corridor
Existing  Footpaths/Pedestrian  Facilities
It is observed  that the existing  footpath  condition  along  the corridor  is varying  from  poor  to excellent  at certain  stretches ; the quality  is 
good ;, whereas,  footpaths  are absent  at many  stretches ..There  are five pedestrian  skywalks  along  the corridor  - one near  Gopalan  Mall ; the 
other  near   Valmiki  Nagar  bus stop,  the third  at Nayandahalli  Metro  station  and the fourth  one near  N.R. Square . The fifth skywalk  is under  
progress  near  Deepanjali  Nagar  shown  in  Figure  296.MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
333
Two wheeler parking on footpath near K.R.Market
Footpath condition near vegetable market
Debris & Garbage dumped in the central median below the flyover near Chamrajpet
Drainage debris on footpath & Carriageway near Tipu Nagar
Skywalk @ Nayandahalli Skywalk @ N.R.Square
Figure 296. Existing footpaths conditions
Skywalk under construction near Deepanjali Nagar
Skywalk @ Valmiki Nagar Bus Stop Skywalk @ Gopalan MallMYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
334
Major  Junctions
Along  the7 km stretch,  there  are nine  major  intersections . List of major  intersections  is as mentioned  below  and shown  in Figure  297 :
Figure 297.Critical Junction along the Corridor•Police   Square  – 3 arm Signalized  intersection . •TCM  Royan  Circle - 4-arm Signalized  intersection .
•Hudson  Circle   – 3 arm Signalized  intersection . •Sirsi  Circle - 5arm Signalized  intersection .
•N.R. Square  – 4 arm Signalized  intersection .•Deepanjali  Nagar  intersection  - 3 arm un signalized   
intersection  one-way  movements .
•Town  Hall  Circle  - 3arm Signalized  Skew  intersection .Nayandahalli interchange on Outer Ring Road
•K.R Market  Intersection  – 4 arm Signalized  intersection .
MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
335
Signage/  Markings/  Signals
The corridor  lacks  right  signboards  at the right  locations ; the signboards  do not have  good  foundation  and most  of the signboards  are either  damaged  or not 
relevant  to the site. The signboards  are installed  on the shoulders  rather  than  on the footpath,  thus  neglecting  the safety  of the road  users . Road  safety  aspects  are 
also ignored  along  the corridor  to a larger  extent  which  is of major  concern . Some  of the safety  issues  are:
•At-grade,  pedestrian  crossings  are completely  neglected,  especially  near  K.R.Market  Circle,  near  Jamia  Masjid  Circle,  between  Town  Hall  and the Sirsi  flyover  up 
ramp,  near  Mysore  Satellite  Station  etc. which  are the locations  with  high  pedestrian  movements . Due to the high  vehicular  speeds,  pedestrians  find it difficult  to 
cross  the roadway  and facilities  like skywalks  or high  raised  pedestrian  crossings  are not provided  along  the corridor . 
•Road  safety  furniture  like cat eyes,  solar  blinkers  etc. are missing  all along  the corridor,  which  are required  for the safe access  during  night . 
•Road  surface  from  Jamia  Masjid  to T.C. Royan  Circle  is very  bad resulting  in frequent  skidding  of two-wheelers  and other  accidents  Figure  298.
•Footpaths  are in very  bad condition,  and need  to be rectified  on priority  especially  in-between  Town  Hall  and the Sirsi  Circle  on either  sides .
Figure 298 Safety issues near K.R Market circle
MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
336
Land  Use Along  the Corridor
Figure 299. Land use along the corridorIt is observed  that majority  of the land  use pattern  along  the corridor  is the commercial  and Mixed  land  use type  and the rest amounts  for 
industrial  and residential  activities . Figure  299.
MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
337
PART B 
SURVEY ANALYSIS
Traffic Survey Details
In order  to assess  the existing  traffic  and transport  characteristic  of the 
corridor  and to decide  on the type  of traffic  management  measures  
needed,  traffic  surveys  were  carried  out. The survey  particulars  are as 
presented  in the following  paragraphs :. The survey  particulars  are as 
presented  below  in Table  90.Traffic  Volume  Counts
Traffic  volume  count  survey  was conducted  at one Mid-block  
location  and for the remaining  stretches,  traffic  volumes  were  
extracted  from  the turning  volume  counts  conducted  along  the 
corridor . The vehicles  counted  were  converted  to Passenger  Car 
Units  (PCUs)  by adopting  equivalent  PCUs . The PCUs  
corresponding  to urban  roads  as per IRC: 106-1990  were  used  and 
the Peak  Hour  Traffic  Volumes  are as presented  below : Table  91.Table 90. Traffic Survey Details
Table 91 Traffic Volume CountsSl.No Type of Survey Quantity
1 Turning Volume Count 7Intersections
2 Mid-block Count 1Location
3 Pedestrian Count Survey 7Intersections
4 Speed And Delay (Bus & Car) 7.5Km
5 Road Network Inventory 7.5Km
6 Traffic Signal Phasing 7 intersections
MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
339
Among  the 8 Mid-Block  locations,  traffic  volume  between  Corporation  
Circle  and Town  Hall  is found  to be the highest  with  10249  PCUs  during  
morning  peak  hour  and 10212  PCUs  during  evening  peak  hour,  followed  by 
Mysore  Road  stretch  between  Deepanjali  Nagar  Junction  and Nayandahalli  
with  a traffic  volume  of 10184 PCUs  during  morning  peak  and 10221  PCUs  
during  evening  peak  hour .
Volume  to Capacity  Ratio  (V/C)  and Level  of Service
Volume  to Capacity  Ratio  (V/C  Ratio)  is defined  as the ratio  of peak  hour  traffic  
flow  rate to capacity  and Level  of Service  (LOS)  is defined  as the a qualitative  
measure,  describing  operational  conditions  within  a traffic  stream  and their  
perception  by the drivers/passengers . 
Universally,  LOS  is lettering  scheme  ranging  from  A to F. LOS  ‘A’ represents  
highest  quality  of service  whereas  LOS  ‘F’ represents  heavily  congested  flow  where  
traffic  demand  exceeds  capacity . The service  measures  used  for defining  LOS  are 
density  and volume -to-capacity  ratio . 
For computation  of V/C  Ratio  the capacity  values  have  been  adopted  based  on the 
road  geometrics  by applying  adjustment  factors  (as per Indo  Highway  Capacity  
Manual  2012 -2017 ) conforming  to the site conditions . 
Adjustment  Factors
Several  factors  would  have  impact  on traffic  movement  and on capacity  as 
compared  to the base  section . The factors  considered  for assessment  of influence  on 
capacity  include  on-street  parking  manoeuvres ; entry  and exit of vehicles  from  
access  road  and bus pull in and pull out manoeuvers  in bus bays  as well  as access  
points . 
The level  of friction  is categorized  as low,  medium  and severe  based  on the extent  
of resistance  or speed  reduction  to the flow  as compared  to base  sections . The 
capacity  of the urban  road  section  is computed  using  the equation :C= Co * FOP* 
FBS*FAC
Where,
C= Actual  Capacity  (PCU/hr)
Co    = Base  Capacity  for Ideal  Condition  (PCU/hr)
FOP  = Adjustment  Factor  for On-street  Parking
FBS = Adjustment  Factor  for Bus Stops
FAC = Adjustment  Factor  for Access  Point
It was observed  that due to kerb  side bus stops,  the effective  road  widths  available  
for movement  of other  vehicles  in the traffic  stream  reduce  resulting  in the capacity  
reduction  at the following  locations :
1.Between  Hudson  Circle  and Corporation  Circle
2.Between  Town  Hall  and KR Market
3.Between  TCM  Royan  Road  Junction  and Sirsi  Circle
4.Between  Old Guddadahalli  Junction  and Deepanjali  Nagar  Junction
5.Between  Deepanjali  Nagar  Junction  and Nayandahalli
As the level  of friction  due to kerb  side bus stops  is high  (frequency  of buses> 30) the 
adjustment  factor  of 0.6 is considered  to compute  the actual  capacity .
It was also observed  that due to on-street  parking  between  KR Market  and TCM  
Royan  Road  Junction  there  is considerable  reduction  in road  capacity  and in the 
stream  speed  of traffic  flow . As the percentage  of intensity  in terms  of parking  
segment  length  occupied  is around  50%, the adjustment  factor  of 0.65 is considered  
to compute  the actual  capacity  for this stretch . 
The ratio  of peak  hour  traffic  flow  rate to capacity  (V/C  Ratio)  and the Level  of 
Service  (LOS)  of the road  sections  along  Mysore  Road  Corridor  are presented  
below . Table  119 and  Figure  384MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
340
Sl. No. Road NameTypology 
of RoadCapacity*Morning Peak Evening Peak
Morning Peak Hour 
Volume (PCUs)V/C Ratio Level of Service*Evening Peak Hour 
Volume (PCUs)V/C Ratio Level of Service*
Towards 
Mysore 
RoadTowards 
Hudson 
CircleTowards 
Mysore 
RoadTowards 
Hudson 
CircleTowards 
Mysore 
RoadTowards 
Hudson 
CircleTowards 
Mysore 
RoadTowards 
Hudson 
CircleTowards 
Mysore 
RoadTowards 
Hudson 
CircleTowards 
Mysore 
RoadTowards 
Hudson 
CircleTowards 
Mysore 
RoadTowards 
Hudson 
Circle
1Between 
Hudson Circle 
and 
Corporation 
Circle6 lane 2520 6678ONE 
WAY2.65ONE 
WAYLOS FONE 
WAY6911ONE 
WAY2.74ONE 
WAYLOS FONE 
WAY
2Between 
Corporation 
Circle and 
Town Hall4 lane 2700 2700 3082 5373 1.14 1.99 LOS F LOS F 3034 5384 1.12 1.99 LOS F LOS F
3Between 
Town Hall 
and KR 
Market6 lane 2520 2520 4850 2438 1.92 0.97 LOS F LOS E 4745 2167 1.88 0.86 LOS F LOS F
4Between KR 
Market and 
TCM Royan 
Road Junction4 lane 1755 1755 3083 2484 1.76 1.42 LOS F LOS F 3722 2463 2.12 1.40 LOS E LOS C
5Between TCM 
Royan Road 
Junction and 
Sirsi Circle4 lane 1620 1620 2762 4844 1.70 2.99 LOS F LOS F 2639 4871 1.63 3.01 LOS F LOS C
6Between Sirsi 
Circle and Old 
Guddahalli 
Road Junction4 lane 2700 2700 2056 3812 0.76 1.41 LOS D LOS F 2240 3667 0.83 1.36 LOS D LOS B
7Between Old 
Guttahalli 
Junction and 
Deepanjali 
Nagar 
Junction6 lane 2520 2520 2082 3687 0.83 1.46 LOS D LOS F 2267 3541 0.90 1.41 LOS E LOS B
8Between 
Deepanjali 
Nagar 
Junction and 
Nayandhalli6 lane 2520 2520 4009 4940 1.59 1.96 LOS F LOS F 4208 4828 1.67 1.92 LOS F LOS FTable 92. Traffic Volume to Capacity ratio and Level of Service MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
341
It can be observed  that the traffic  approaching  at all the locations  exceeds  beyond  the road  capacity  resulting  in considerable  delay  and queuing . 
The volume  to capacity  ratio  at all the locations  exceeds  1.0 and the Level  of Service  is found  to be ‘F’ which  indicates  heavily  congested  flow  where  traffic  demand  
exceeds  capacity .Figure 300 . Volume to Capacity Ratios along Tumkur Road Corridor both Morning & Evening
MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
342
Traffic  Volume  at Junctions
The traffic  volumes  at intersections  help  in assessing  the traffic  volumes  at mid-block  locations  of the arms  of the intersection  which  
together  with  journey  speed  and road  inventory  data  aid in evaluating  the Level  of Service  (LOS)  of Urban  Arterials  and further,  the traffic  
volumes  at mid-block  also establishes  the need  for safe pedestrian  crossing  facility  taking  into account  the pedestrian  crossing  volumes  
Table  93.
The vehicles  counted  were  converted  to Passenger  Car Units  (PCUs)  by adopting  equivalent  PCUs . 
Vehicles
PCUs
Vehicles
PCUs
1 Hudson Circle 12572 9270 11.00-12.00 12697 941919.15-
20.15
2Corporation Circle-
Near Unity Building10416 7717 10.15-11.15 10285 763919.15-
20.15
3 Town Hall Junction 12272 8590 9.00-10.00 11593 801217.30-
18.30
4 KR Market 10057 6664 11.00-12.00 10132 696118.30-
19.30
5TCM Royan Road 
Junction6652 4746 9.00-10.00 7082 503418.15-
19.15
6 Sirsi Circle 13433 9939 9.30-10.30 13365 988018.00-
19.00
7Old Guddadahalli 
Road Junction6702 4846 10.15-11.15 6920 491119.30-
20.30Sl. No. Junction NameMorning Peak 
Hour Volume
Morning  
Peak HourEvening Peak 
Hour Volume
Evening 
Peak Hour
Among  the 7 turning  volume  count  surveyed  locations,  Sirsi  Circle  is found  to be having  the highest  peak  hour  volume  (9939  PCUs  during  morning  
peak  and 9880  PCUs  during  evening  peak)  followed  by Hudson  Circle  with  9270  PCUs  during  morning  peak  and 9419  PCUs  during  evening  peak .Table 93. Traffic Volume at Junctions MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
343
Speed  & delay  survey  provides  a link wise  estimate  of journey  time,  running  time  and delay . Speed  and Delay  Survey  was carried  out for Bus and Car separately  
during  morning  and evening  peak  hours . In case of Car Speed  and Delay  Survey,  floating  car technique  has been  utilized  for obtaining  data  wherein  the driver  is 
instructed  to follow  the designated  route  course,  while  maintaining  the average  speed  of other  traffic  and accompanied  by trained  members  of the team  who  record  
the cumulative  time  at specified  timing  points  to ensure  obtaining  the average  link travel  time  of the road  network . Speed  and Delay
The overall  travel  speed  generally  referred  to as journey  speed  is the effective  speed  between  two points  and is computed  as the distance  divided  by the total  time  
taken  by the vehicle  to complete  the journey  including  delays  incurred  en-route . 
The direction -wise  abstract  on analysis  along  Hosur  Road  Corridor  furnishing  the name  of road,  length  surveyed,  journey  speed  and running  speed  is furnished  
below . Table  94.
Table 94. Bus Speed and Delay - Towards Nayandahalli (Morning Peak)
Sl.No.Carriageway 
Category From Node To NodeLength(in 
Km) Delay (Sec)Journey 
Time (Sec)Running 
Time (Sec)Journey 
Speed 
(Kmph)Running 
Speed 
(Kmph) Reasons for Delay
1 Two Way Hudson CircleKalinga 
Rao Road 
Junction 0.42 210 297 87 5 17Merging & Diverging of 
traffic, signal delays, 
pedestrain crossings
2 Two WayKalinga Rao 
Road JunctionTown Hall 
Junction 0.25 25 98 73 9 12 Narrow roadn& Signal delay
3 Two WayTown Hall 
JunctionK.R.Market 
Junction 0.93 100 260 160 13 21on street parking y LCVs 
traffic divering and merging 
issue 
4 Two WayK.R.Market 
JunctionRoyan 
Circle 1.19 80 295 215 15 20Signal delay & tarffic flow 
delay
5 Two Way Royan CircleSirsi Circle 
(Alur 
Venkata 
Rao Road) 1.02 267 521 254 7 14Narrow roads, hapazard on 
street parking, truck 
movements, Jay walkers, 
hawkers, Potholes, debris on 
road  etc
6 Two WaySirsi Circle 
(Alur Venkata 
Rao Road)Bapuji 
Nagar 
Junction 2.15 141 528 387 15 20White topping work under 
progress
7 Two WayBapuji Nagar 
JunctionDeepanjali 
Nagar 
Junction 0.52 0 189 189 10 10
8 Two WayDeepanjali 
Nagar 
JunctionORR 
Underpass 1.17 34 318 284 13 15 Traffic flow delays
11 16 AVERAGEMYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
344
Sl.No.Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To NodeLength(in 
Km)Delay (Sec)Journey 
Time (Sec)Running 
Time (Sec)Journey 
Speed 
(Kmph)Running 
Speed 
(Kmph)Reasons for Delay
1 Two WayRing Road 
UnderpassDeepanjali 
Nagar Junction1.13 22 321 299 13 14 Traffic flow delays
2 Two WayDeepanjali 
Nagar 
JunctionBapuji Nagar 
Junction0.78 27 220 193 13 15 Traffic flow delays
3 Two WayBapuji Nagar 
JunctionSirsi Circle 
Junction2.18 422 891 469 9 17Traffic diversion, white 
topping work underprogress
4 Two WaySirsi Circle 
JunctionVinayaka 
Theatre 
Junction1.02 0 255 255 14 14
5 Two WayVinayaka 
Theatre 
JunctionChurch Circle 
Junction0.2 0 50 50 14 14
6 Two WayChurch Circle 
JunctionK.R.Market 
Junction0.75 182 219 37 12 73Narrow roads, hapazard on 
street parking, truck 
movements, Jay walkers, 
hawkers, Potholes, debris on 
road  etc
7 Two WayK.R.Market 
JunctionTown Hall 
Junction0.91 80 251 171 13 19Signal delay and pedestrain 
crossings at K.R. Maket circle
8 Two WayTown Hall 
JunctionKalinga Rao 
Road Junction0.25 29 76 47 12 19 Traffic flow delays
9 Two WayKalinga Rao 
Road JunctionHudson Circle 0.26 37 133 96 7 10Signal delay & Traffic flow 
delay
12 22 AVERAGETable 95. Bus Speed and Delay - Towards Begur (Morning Peak)MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
345
Sl.No.Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To NodeLength(in 
Km)Delay (Sec)Journey 
Time (Sec)Running 
Time (Sec)Journey 
Speed 
(Kmph)Running 
Speed 
(Kmph)Reasons for Delay
1 Two WayHudson 
CircleKalinga 
Rao Road 
Junction0.42 51 124 73 12 21Merging & 
Diverging of 
traffic, signal 
delays, pedestrain 
crossings
2 Two WayKalinga 
Rao Road 
JunctionTown Hall 
Junction0.25 48 113 65 8 14Narrow roadn& 
Signal delay
3 Two WayTown Hall 
JunctionK.R.Market 
Junction0.93 66 255 189 13 18on street parking 
of  LCVs , traffic 
divering and 
merging issue 
4 Two WayK.R.Market 
JunctionVinayaka 
Theatre 
Junction0.96 0 289 289 12 12
5 Two WayVinayaka 
Theatre 
JunctionSirsi Circle 
Junction1.03 0 290 290 13 13
6 Two WaySirsi Circle 
JunctionBapuji 
Nagar 
Junction2.18 115 582 467 13 17White topping 
work under 
progress
7 Two WayBapuji 
Nagar 
JunctionDeepanjali 
Nagar 
Junction0.52 0 157 157 12 12
8 Two WayDeepanjali 
Nagar 
JunctionORR 
Underpass1.17 220 497 277 8 15Vehicle break 
down, Traffic flow 
delays
11 15 AVERAGETable  96. Bus Speed and Delay - Towards Nayandahalli(Evening Peak)MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
346
Sl.No.Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To Node       Length       
     (in Km)Delay (Sec)Journey 
Time (Sec)Running 
Time (Sec)Journey 
Speed 
(Kmph)Running 
Speed 
(Kmph)Reasons for Delay
1 Two WayRing Road 
UnderpassDeepanjali 
Nagar 
Junction1.13 16 328 312 12 13 Traffic flow delays
2 Two WayDeepanjali 
Nagar 
JunctionBapuji 
Nagar 
Junction0.78 12 211 199 13 14 Traffic flow delays
3 Two WayBapuji 
Nagar 
JunctionSirsi Circle 
Junction2.18 75 514 439 15 18Traffic diversion, 
white topping 
work 
underprogress
4 Two WaySirsi Circle 
JunctionVinayaka 
Theatre 
Junction1.02 0 280 280 13 13
5 Two WayVinayaka 
Theatre 
JunctionK.R.Market 
Junction0.95 43 226 183 15 19 Traffic flow delays
6 Two WayK.R.Market 
JunctionKalinga 
Rao Road 
Junction1.16 320 498 178 8 23Narrow roads, 
hapazard on 
street parking, 
truck movements, 
Jay walkers, 
hawkers, Potholes, 
debris on road  
etc
7 Two WayKalinga 
Rao Road 
JunctionHudson 
Circle0.26 69 139 70 7 13Signal delay and 
pedestrain 
crossings at k>r. 
Maket circle
12 16 AVERAGETable 97. Bus Speed and Delay - Towards Hudson Circle(Evening Peak)
It was observed that the lower journey speeds are mainly due to traffic congestion and the delays are mostly occurring at jun ctions. The 
Average Bus Journey Speed is approximately 11Kmph during both morning peak hour and evening peak hour. Figure 385 -386.MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
347
Figure 301. Average Bus 
Speed 
and Delay (Morning Peak )
Figure 302. Average Bus 
Speed
 and Delay (Evening Peak )MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
348
Car speed and delay
The Average Car Journey speeds are shown below Table 98-99:
Table 98. Car Speed & 
Deal Details –
Towards 
Nayandahalli(Mornin
g Peak)
Sl.No.Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To Node     Length     
 (in Km)Delay (Sec)Journey 
Time (Sec)Running 
Time (Sec)Journey 
Speed 
(Kmph)Running 
Speed 
(Kmph)Reasons for Delay
1 One way Hudson CircleKalinga Rao 
Road Junction0.42 89 156 67 10 23Signal Delay and Traffic flow 
delays
2 Two WayKalinga Rao 
Road JunctionTown Hall 
Junction0.25 35 87 52 10 17 Traffic flow delays
3 Two WayTown Hall 
JunctionK.R.Market 
Junction0.93 89 221 132 15 25On street Parking and traffic 
flow delays
4 Two WayK.R.Market 
JunctionRoyan Circle 1.19 112 276 164 16 26Hawkers on road , Pedestrain 
crossings and signal delay
5 Two Way Royan CircleSirsi Circle (Alur 
Venkata Rao 
Road)1.02 76 241 165 15 22Bad roads, debris on roads, 
on street parking
6 Two WaySirsi Circle 
(Alur Venkata 
Rao Road)Bapuji Nagar 
Junction2.15 99 503 404 15 19 White topping works 
7 Two WayBapuji Nagar 
JunctionDeepanjali 
Nagar Junction0.52 33 126 93 15 20Signal delay and traffic flow 
delays
8 Two WayDeepanjali 
Nagar 
JunctionORR Underpass 1.17 85 289 204 15 21 Traffic flow delays
14 22 AV E RAGE
Sl.No.Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To NodeLength(in 
Km)Delay (Sec)Journey 
Time (Sec)Running 
Time (Sec)Journey 
Speed 
(Kmph)Running 
Speed 
(Kmph)Reasons for Delay
1 Two WayRing Road 
UnderpassDeepanjali 
Nagar Junction1.13 56 265 209 15 19Signal delay and traffic flow 
delays
2 Two WayDeepanjali 
Nagar 
JunctionBapuji Nagar 
Junction0.78 32 203 171 14 16 Traffic flow delays
3 Two WayBapuji Nagar 
JunctionSirsi Circle 
Junction2.18 109 543 434 14 18Traffic diversion, white 
topping work underprogress
4 Two WaySirsi Circle 
JunctionRoyan Circle 1.02 88 263 175 14 21Bad roads, debris on roads, 
on street parking
5 Two Way Royan CircleK.R.Market 
Junction1.19 37 298 261 14 16 Traffic flow delays
6 Two WayK.R.Market 
JunctionTown Hall 
Junction0.75 102 178 76 15 36Signal delay and pedestrain 
crossings at K.R. Maket circle
7 One WayTown Hall 
JunctionHudson Circle 0.91 98 251 153 13 21On street parking by LCVs 
and cars
14 21 AVERAGE
Table 99. Car Speed & Deal Details –Towards Hudson Circle(Morning Peak)MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
349
Table 100. Car Speed 
& Deal Details –
Towards 
Nayandahalli 
(Evening Peak)
S l.No.Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node T o Node Length(in Km) Delay (S ec)Journey T ime 
(S ec)Running 
T ime (S ec)Journey 
S peed (Kmph)Running 
S peed (Kmph)Reasons for Delay
1 One wayHudson 
CircleKalinga 
Rao Road 
Junction0.42 95 143 48 11 32Signal Delay and 
Traffic flow delays
2 Two WayKalinga 
Rao Road 
JunctionTown Hall 
Junction0.25 29 85 56 11 16 Traffic flow delays
3 Two WayTown Hall 
JunctionK.R.Market 
Junction0.93 97 249 152 13 22On street Parking 
and traffic flow 
delays
4 Two WayK.R.Market 
JunctionRoyan 
Circle1.19 109 303 194 14 22Hawkers on road , 
Pedestrain 
crossings and 
signal delay
5 Two WayRoyan 
CircleSirsi Circle 
(Alur 
Venkata 
Rao Road)1.02 83 256 173 14 21Bad roads, debris 
on roads, on 
street parking
6 Two WaySirsi Circle 
(Alur 
Venkata 
Rao Road)Bapuji 
Nagar 
Junction2.15 104 521 417 15 19White topping 
works 
7 Two WayBapuji 
Nagar 
JunctionDeepanjali 
Nagar 
Junction0.52 41 139 98 13 19Signal delay and 
traffic flow delays
8 Two WayDeepanjali 
Nagar 
JunctionORR 
Underpass1.17 96 304 208 14 20 Traffic flow delays
13 21 AV E RAGE
Sl.No.Carriageway 
CategoryFrom Node To NodeLength(in 
Km)Delay (Sec)Journey 
Time (Sec)Running 
Time (Sec)Journey 
Speed 
(Kmph)Running 
Speed 
(Kmph)Reasons for Delay
1 Two WayRing Road 
UnderpassDeepanjali 
Nagar Jn1.13 69 281 212 14 19Signal delay and 
traffic flow delays
2 Two WayDeepanjali 
Nagar JnBapuji 
Nagar Jn0.78 43 208 165 14 17 Traffic flow delays
3 Two WayBapuji 
Nagar JnSirsi Circle 
Jn2.18 117 543 426 14 18Traffic diversion, 
white topping 
work 
underprogress
4 Two WaySirsi Circle 
JnRoyan 
Circle1.02 95 280 185 13 20Bad roads, debris 
on roads, on 
street parking
5 Two WayRoyan 
CircleK.R.Market 
Jn1.19 58 302 244 14 18 Traffic flow delays
6 Two WayK.R.Market 
JnTown Hall 
Jn0.75 98 178 80 15 34Signal delay and 
pedestrain 
crossings at K.R. 
Maket circle
7 One WayTown Hall 
JnHudson 
Circle0.91 107 251 144 13 23On street parking 
by LCVs and cars
14 21 AVERAGE
Table 101. Car Speed & Deal 
Details –Towards Hudson 
Circle(Evening Peak)MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
350
The Average  Car Journey  Speed  is approximately  14Kmph  during  morning  peak  hour  and 13Kmphduring  evening  peak  hour . 
Figure  387-388.
Figure 303. Average Car 
Speed
 and Delay (Morning 
Peak )
Figure 304. Average Car Speed and 
Delay (Evening Peak )MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
351
Link No Name of RoadName of 
Starting PointName of Ending 
PointCarriageway Width
Road type 
LHS Width MedianRH
S 
Wi
dth
1
Mysore  Road Hudson Circle N.R Square 24 One way Bituminous
2N.R SquareTown Hall 21 Two way Bituminous
3Town Hall Start of S. P Road 36 One way Bituminous
4Start of S.P 
RoadK.R. Market 15 Two way Bituminous
5K.R Market TCM Royan Circle 15 Two way Bituminous
6 Sirsi Circle Deepanjali nagar42 Two way Bituminous
7Deepanjali 
nagar Vijayanagar junction21 One way Bituminous
8Vijayanagar 
junction
NayandahalliVarying 
from 21 to 
36mTwo way BituminousTable 102. Road Inventory Details along the CorridorRoad  Inventory  Details  MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
352
Figure 305. Road Inventory along Mysore Road Road  Inventory  Details  MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
353
Road  Inventory  Details  
Figure 306 Road Inventory along Mysore Road MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
354
Road  Inventory  Details  
Figure 307. Road Inventory along Mysore Road MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
355
Road  Inventory  Details  
Figure 308. Road Inventory along Mysore Road MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
356
PART C 
ISSUE IDENTIFICATION AND 
SOLUTIONS
357
The area  around  K.R Market  and surrounding  has always  been  and 
remains  a commercial  hub,  selling  everything  from  salvaged  automobile  
parts  to wholesale  vegetables,  clothes,  shoes  and furniture . The land  use 
by itself  is a reason  for the movement  of a large  number  of people  and 
goods . This  is coupled  with  a dense  old city fabric  with  winding  narrow  
lanes,  no visible  road  hierarchy  or travel  lanes,  disorganized  parking  and 
a complete  lack of pedestrian  infrastructure . These  have  made  the 
movement  within  the area  with  any mode  of transport,  a nightmare . 
Throw  in heavy  goods  vehicles  and the result  is a complete  chaos . The 
pedestrian  is the one who  faces  the most  hazard,  as he / she has to 
weave  in and out of this traffic  while  navigating  other  obstacles  such  as 
vendors  and piles  of garbage . Figure  309.
`✓Optimization  of the signal  as an immediate  measure
✓Provision  of segregated  pedestrian  right  of way
✓Redesign  of Intersection  geometry  as shown  in Figure  310. Figure 296. Issues near Shooley junction1.Un-scientific Geometric Design and Signal Design at 
K.R.Market
Recommendations:
The KR Market  junction  is formed  with  the intersection  of NR Road  
running  east west  with  KR Road  to the south  and Avenue  Road  in 
north . This  Junction  was grade  separated  in 1990  in the east west  
direction  in an effort  to ease  traffic  flow  conditions . The northern  
half of NR road  is known  as SJP Road . In addition,  the junction  has a 
pedestrian  subway  on the western  side of the junction  and this is 
poorly  maintained  and very  rarely  used  due to its dilapidated  status . 
An incomplete  subway  lies towards  the eastern  side rendering  this 
junction  to a nightmare  for the pedestrians . A fixed  time  traffic  
signal  operates  as a control  
for traffic  at grade . However,  traffic  police  personnel  manually  operate  the 
signal  for most  part of the day.
Major  mobility  issues  at this junction  can be summarized  as:
Disorganized  movement  of goods  - loading,  unloading  and parking  
Poor  road  and pedestrian  infrastructure  
Lack  of organized  parking  
Poorly  defined  and chaotic  city market  bus terminus  
Poor  last mile  connectivity  to public  transport  
Extremely  large  Volume  of Pedestrians  using  the intersection  for cross  
movement
Lack  of Pedestrian  Facilities
Presence  of bus terminals  close  by on the eastern  side of Junction  on the north  
and southern  sides  of NR Road  (In a day,  600 buses,  including  city buses  and 
outstation  buses  ply from  the bus terminus  located  south  east of the market,  
providing  connectivity  all over  the city and outside ; source -BSCL)
Unscientific  Junction  geometrics  at grade  
Irrational  Signal  Control  System
Very  high  level  of encroachment  and street  vending
Lack  of strict  enforcement  and lack of civil  sense  
Figure 309: K.R.Market   JunctionMYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
358
Figure 311: K.R.Market  Junction Redesign of Intersection Geometry
Benefits:
➢Once the signal optimization is done along with proposed geometric corrections, junction delays will be reduced and congestio ns will 
come down. MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
359
``Figure 312. Black Spot at K.R.Market Circle2. Black Spot at K.R. Market Circle / Annapoorna Circle
This  is a five-arm intersection . The major  fatalities  occurring  are due conflicts  between  the Pedestrians  and the BMTC  buses . BMTC  buses  coming  from  Town  Hall  and moving  towards  
Kalasipalyam  take the left turn  at the circle . While  taking  the left turn  it is observed  that pedestrian/  commuters  stop  at this turning  to board  the buses,  resulting  in fatal  accidents .  Due 
to pedestrian  negligence  and rash  driving  of BMTC  drivers,  ten accidents  have  occurred  in past three  years . 
As evident  from  Table  124 it can be inferred  that total  fatalities  over  the last 3 years  is three  (3). In addition  the grievous  injures  are at seven  (07) which  again  is a serious  concern . The 
detailed  observations  and recommendations  are mention  below . Figure  312
Year No of Grevious Injuries No of Fatalities
2017 4 3
2018 1 0
2019 2 0V.V. Puram Traffic  Police Station Limits
Accident Record at Annapoorna Circle, K.R.Market
Table 124. Accident Record at K.R.Market Circle
Figure 313. Accident Record at K.R.Market Circle
Observations:
•All the accidents  involved  at this location  are between  the BMTC  buses  and the 
pedestrians,  reason  being  the negligence  of pedestrians  and rash driving  by the BMTC  
buses  while  taking  the left turn .
•Other  reason  is that on the free left turn,  the buses  stop to pick up the commuters  
there  by hitting  the commuters  and pedestrians . Figure  314MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
360
``
Figure 314 Black spots at
 Annapoorva  Junction
Figure 315. Black spots at Annapoorva  Junction MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
361
``Recommendations:
Benefits:
3. Black Spot on Sirsi Flyover
Figure 316. Accident Record On Mysore Road Flyover •To reduce  the speed  of BMTC  buses  while  turning  left, a high  raised  
speed  breaker    should  be constructed  on corner  of the N.R Road  just 
before  the left turn .
•Sign  board  for “speed  breaker  and GO SLOW"  need  to be installed  
as per IRC standards  before  the high  raised  speed  breaker .
•Bus stop  at the turning  need  to be shifted  further  ahead  by at least  20 
meters .
•Pedestrian Safety will increase.
•Vehicle -Pedestrian crashes will be reduced.
•Rash driving from BMTC buses with be controlled.
Black  spot  is located  on top of BGS  /city  market  flyover/Sirsi   
flyover . All accidents  occurring  at the flyover  are due to over  
speeding  on the reverse  curve . The reason  for this is the sharp  
turning  radius  and lesser  transition  length  in between  the curves . Due 
to lesser  transition  length  it is difficult  to negotiate  the vehicle  at very  
high  speeds,  thus  leading  to fatal  accidents . The central  median  is 
neither  painted  nor provided  with  any sort of road  safety  furniture  to 
guide  the road  users  about  the approaching  curve  profile . This  stretch  
of reverse  curve  needs  to be addressed  in the scientific  manner  and in 
the absence  of proper  signage  system  and road  safety  furniture,  road  
users  are unable  to negotiate  the curve  safely . The detailed  
observations  and recommendations  are mention  below  . Figure  316 
and Table  103.
Year Total Accidents Total Fatalities
2016 2 3
2017 4 2
2018 5 1City Market  Police Station Limits
Accident Record on Mysore road flyover ( From Market 
circle to Jamia Masjid):  Black spotObservations:
➢In the absence  of speed  calming  measures,  the vehicles  are over  
speeding  leading  to fatal  accidents . Observed  journey  speed  during  
the off peak  hours  is more  than  80km/hr  on the flyover .
➢Presence  of sharp  reverse  curve  with  shorter  negotiation  distance  is 
another  reason  for fatal  accidents ; here  the vehicles  are unable  to 
negotiate  the transition  length  between  the curves  and there  by losing  
the balance  and resulting  in accidents .
➢The median  does  not have  any road  safety  furniture  to guide  the 
road  users  of the approaching  curve  profile .
➢Absence  of cautionary  signage  system  like chevron  signs,  speed  
limits  is resulting  in accidents .Figure -317
Table169. Accident Record at Sirsi Flyover MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
Table 103. Accident Record at Sirsi  FLyover
362
``Recommendations:
➢Road  Safety  Furniture  like Flexible  median  
markers  needs  to be installed  on the central  median  
throughout  the flyover  along  with  delineators  / 
Bollards  to guide  the road  users . 
➢The railing  pipes  provided  on the parapet  wall  
need  to be installed  with  reflective  tape  to increase  
safety  during  the night  throughout  the flyover .
➢Flexible  median  markers  need  to be installed  on 
the parapet  wall  for the reverse  curve  portion .
Figure 317. Corrected Black Spot ➢To reduce  the speed  on the main  carriageway,  
thermoplastic  rumble  strips  should  be painted . 
The safety  pattern  is as recommended  in IRC-99-
2018 , which  says  to treat  any black  spot  location  
120m ahead  from  the approaching  accidental  spot  
as shown  in the figure,  and need  to be treated   on 
either  sides  as a measure  of traffic  calming .
➢The Rumble  strips  should  be in a set of five on 
each  side with  each  set having  six numbers  of 
strips  making  it in total  ten sets. One of the set 
located  very  next  to the approaching  point  of the 
black  spot  should  be at the height  of 15mm and 
300mm wide  on either  sides,  while  the other  sets of 
four  should  be 5mm thick  and 300mm wide  on 
each  side
•Cat eyes  or RPMs  should  be install  across  the 
roads  at the start  of every  rumble  strip  pattern  in 
the zig-zag pattern  at an interval  of 0.5 meters  
apart,  so that it has two impacts  on the road  users . 
Firstly,  during  the day,  it gives  a rumbling  effect  
and during  the night,  it will reflect  and shows  the 
probable  approaching  hazard  ahead .
•In order  to negotiate  the curve,  Chevron  
signboards  need  to be installed  on the parapet  
wall  of the flyover,  which  will guide  the road  
users  to drive  safely  on the curve  negotiate  it 
carefully .
•It was also observed  that the flyover  has one up 
ramp  and three  down  ramps,  for which  split  ends  
need  to be treated  with  solar  cat eyes,  bollards,  cat 
eyes  and if possible  water  crash  barriers .
Figure  317.MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
363
``Figure 318. Corrected Black Spot from Mysore Road to Jamia Masjid 
MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
364
``Figure 319. Key Map of all the Issues along the Corridor
MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
365
PART D
SUMMARY AND IMPACT OF MEASURES
366
``Table 104. Comparison chart between existing scenario and proposed scenarioThe comparison  between  existing  operational  scenario  and the operational  scenario  after  implementing  the interventions  discussed  in the 
previous  chapter  along  Mysore  Road  Corridor  is tabulated  in Table  126.  From  Table  170 it can be seen  that with  the implementation  of the 
interventions,  there  will be considerable  reduction  in Volume  to Capacity  Ratio  (V/C  Ratio)  Old Madras  Road  Corridor . 
A summary  of the existing  travel  parameters  versus  the improved  parameters  after  the recommended  interventions  is given  in comparison  
statement  Table  104.
Sl. No.  Road Name  EXISTING  
Capacity  Morning Peak 
Hour Volume 
(PCUs)  V/C Ratio -
Morning Peak  Level of Service -
Morning Peak  Bus Journey 
Speed (Kmph) -
Morning Peak  Car Journey 
Speed (Kmph) -
Morning Peak  Towards 
Mysore 
Road  
Towards 
Hudson 
Circle  
Towards 
Mysore 
Road  
Towards 
Hudson 
Circle  
Towards 
Mysore 
Road  
Towards 
Hudson 
Circle  
Towards 
Mysore 
Road  
Towards 
Hudson 
Circle  
Towards 
Mysore 
Road  
Towards 
Hudson 
Circle  
Towards 
Mysore 
Road  
Towards 
Hudson 
Circle  
1 Between Hudson Circle and 
Corporation Circle  2520  ONE 
WAY  6678  ONE 
WAY  3 ONE 
WAY  LOS F  ONE 
WAY  12   10   
2 Between Corporation Circle and 
Town Hall  2700  2700  3082  5373  1 2 LOS F  LOS F  8 13 10 13 
3 Between Town Hall and KR Market  2520  2520  4850  2438  2 1 LOS F  LOS E  13 12 15 15 
4 Between KR Market and TCM 
Royan Road Junction  1755  1755  3083  2484  2 1 LOS F  LOS F  12 14 16 14 
5 Between TCM Royan Road 
Junction and Sirsi Circle  1620  1620  2762  4844  2 3 LOS F  LOS F  13 14 15 14 
6 Between Sirsi Circle and Old 
Guddahalli Road Junction  2700  2700  2056  3812  1 1 LOS D  LOS F  13 9 15 14 
7 Between Old Guttahalli Junction 
and Deepanjali Nagar Junction  2520  2520  2082  3687  1 1 LOS D  LOS F  12 13 15 14 
8 Between Deepanjali Nagar 
Junction and Nayandhalli  2520  2520  4009  4940  2 2 LOS F  LOS F  8 13 15 15 
 MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
367
``
Towards Mysore 
RoadTowards Hudson 
CircleTowards Mysore RoadTowards Hudson 
CircleTowards 
Mysore RoadTowards 
Hudson 
CircleTowards 
Mysore RoadTowards 
Hudson Circle
1Between Hudson Circle and 
Corporation Circle4200 1.59 LOS F 15
2Between Corporation Circle and 
Town Hall2700 2700 1.14 1.99 LOS F LOS F 15 15
3 Between Town Hall and KR Market 4200 4200 1.15 0.58 LOS F LOS C 15 30
4Between KR Market and TCM 
Royan Road Junction2700 2700 1.14 0.92 LOS F LOS E 15 25
5Between TCM Royan Road 
Junction and Sirsi Circle2700 2700 1.02 1.79 LOS F LOS F 15 15
6Between Sirsi Circle and Old 
Guddahalli Road Junction2700 2700 0.76 1.41 LOS D LOS F 25 15
7Between Old Guttahalli Junction 
and Deepanjali Nagar Junction4200 4200 0.50 0.88 LOS C LOS E 30 25
8Between Deepanjali Nagar 
Junction and Nayandhalli 4200 4200 0.95 1.18 LOS E LOS F 25 15Sl. No.Capacity V/C Ratio-Morning PeakLevel of Service-Morning 
PeakWITH IMPROVEMENTS
Road Name Anticipated Speed (Kmph) as 
per HCM-Morning PeakTable 105. Comparison chart between existing scenario and proposed scenarioMYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
368
``
Sl. No.  Road Name  EXISTING  
Capacity  Evening  Peak 
Hour Volume 
(PCUs)  V/C Ratio -
Evening  Peak  Level of Service -Evening  
Peak  Bus Journey Speed 
(Kmph) - Evening 
Peak  Car Journey 
Speed (Kmph) - 
Evening  Peak  Towards 
Mysore 
Road  
Towards 
Hudson 
Circle  
Towards 
Mysore 
Road  
Towards 
Hudson 
Circle  
Towards 
Mysore 
Road  
Towards 
Hudson 
Circle  
Towards 
Mysore 
Road  
Towards 
Hudson 
Circle  
Towards 
Mysore 
Road  
Towards 
Hudson 
Circle  
Towards 
Mysore 
Road  
Towards 
Hudson 
Circle  
1 Between Hudson Circle and 
Corporation Circle  2520  ONE 
WAY  6911  ONE 
WAY  2.74 ONE 
WAY  LOS F  ONE WAY  12   11   
2 Between Corporation Circle 
and Town Hall  2700  2700  3034  5384  1.12 1.99 LOS F  LOS F  8 8 11 13 
3 Between Town Hall and KR 
Market  2520  2520  4745  2167  1.88 0.86 LOS F  LOS F  13 8 13 15 
4 Between KR Market and TCM 
Royan Road Junction  1755  1755  3722  2463  2.12 1.40 LOS E  LOS C  12 15 14 14 
5 Between TCM Royan Road 
Junction and Sirsi Circle  1620  1620  2639  4871  1.63 3.01 LOS F  LOS C  13 13 14 13 
6 Between Sirsi Circle and Old 
Guddahalli Road Junction  2700  2700  2240  3667  0.83 1.36 LOS D  LOS B  13 15 15 14 Table 106. Comparison chart between existing scenario and proposed scenarioMYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
369
``
Towards Mysore 
RoadTowards 
Hudson CircleTowards 
Mysore RoadTowards 
Hudson CircleTowards 
Mysore RoadTowards 
Hudson 
CircleTowards 
Mysore RoadTowards 
Hudson Circle
1Between Hudson Circle and 
Corporation Circle4200 ONE WAY 1.65 ONE WAY LOS F ONE WAY 15 ONE WAY
2Between Corporation Circle 
and Town Hall2700 2700 1.12 1.99 LOS F LOS F 15 15
3Between Town Hall and KR 
Market4200 4200 1.13 0.52 LOS F LOS C 15 30
4Between KR Market and TCM 
Royan Road Junction2700 2700 1.38 0.91 LOS F LOS E 15 25
5Between TCM Royan Road 
Junction and Sirsi Circle2700 2700 0.98 1.80 LOS E LOS F 25 15
6Between Sirsi Circle and Old 
Guddahalli Road Junction2700 2700 0.83 1.36 LOS D LOS F 25 15
7Between Old Guttahalli 
Junction and Deepanjali Nagar 
Junction4200 4200 0.54 0.84 LOS C LOS D 30 25
8Between Deepanjali Nagar 
Junction and Nayandhalli 4200 4200 1.00 1.15 LOS F LOS F 15 15Sl. No. Road Name WITH IMPROVEMENTS
Capacity V/C Ratio-Evening  PeakLevel of Service-Evening  
PeakAnticipated Speed (Kmph) as 
per HCM-Evening  PeakTable 107. Comparison chart between existing scenario and proposed scenarioMYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
370
``
Corridor  21: Elevated  corridor  from  Sirsi  circle  to Nayandahalli
Sirsi  Circle
NayandahalliDeepanjalinagarElevated Corridor from Sirsi Circle to Nayandahalli
Based  on the traffic  analysis,  it has been  identified  that the stretch  between  Sirsi  Circle  and Nayandahalli  Junction  requires  improvements  
to ensure  smoother  traffic  flow . To address  this, an elevated  corridor  is proposed,  extending  from  the existing  Sirsi  Flyover  to 
Nayandahalli . The design  includes  an elevated  rotary  at the Deepanjalinagar  Junction  along  Mysore  Road,  as depicted  in the detailed  
figure  320
This  elevated  corridor  will feature  a direct  connecting  loop  from  the existing  Sirsi  Flyover  towards  K.R. Market,  coming  from  
Nayandahalli,  along  with  an upward  ramp  and a downward  ramp  before  the Sirsi  Flyover  begins . Additionally,  a downward  ramp  is 
provided  near  Deepanjalinagar  Junction  to facilitate  traffic  heading  towards  Vijayanagar  via West  of Chord  Road . The elevated  rotary  will 
be constructed  at the first level  to enable  seamless  traffic  movement  from  all four  directions .MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
Figure 320 Proposed Elevated Corridor from Sirsi circle to Nayandahalli on Mysore road371
``An elevated  rotary  (also  known  as an elevated  roundabout  or flyover  roundabout)  is a type  of circular  intersection  where  a roundabout  structure  
is raised  above  ground  level,  often  used  to manage  traffic  at congested  intersections  or freeway  interchanges . Elevated  rotaries  aim to allow  
traffic  to flow  without  stopping,  reducing  congestion  by removing  traffic  signals  or intersections  on the ground  level  below .
Advantages  of Elevated  Rotary
1.Improved  Traffic  Flow : Elevated  rotaries  allow  continuous  traffic  movement,  reducing  stops,  delays,  and congestion .
2.Enhanced  Safety : Fewer  conflict  points  compared  to traditional  intersections  reduce  the likelihood  of accidents .
3.Efficient  Land  Use: By building  vertically,  elevated  rotaries  make  efficient  use of space,  especially  in urban  or densely  populated  areas .
4.Reduced  Pollution  and Fuel  Consumption : Smoother  traffic  flow  means  fewer  idling  vehicles,  leading  to lower  emissions  and fuel use.
5.Aesthetic  Value : Well -designed  elevated  structures  can add architectural  appeal  to urban  settings .
Disadvantages  of Elevated  Rotary
1.High  Construction  Costs : Building  elevated  structures  is expensive  due to the materials,  labor,  and engineering  complexity .
2.Maintenance  Challenges : Elevated  rotaries  require  regular  maintenance  and inspections  to ensure  structural  integrity,  adding  to long -term  
costs .
3.Complex  Navigation : Drivers  unfamiliar  with  elevated  rotaries  may  find them  challenging  to navigate,  increasing  the chance  of confusion  and 
accidents .
4.Visual  and Noise  Impact : Elevated  structures  may  obstruct  views,  reduce  natural  light,  and generate  more  noise,  affecting  the quality  of life for 
nearby  residents .
5.Accessibility  Issues : For pedestrians  and cyclists,  elevated  rotaries  may  be less accessible  or safe,  requiring  additional  infrastructure  like ramps  
or underpasses .Elevated Rotary
Summary
While  elevated  rotaries  improve  traffic  
flow  and safety,  they  come  with  high  costs  
and certain  environmental  and social  
impacts . They  are best suited  for heavily  
congested  intersections  where  the benefits  
outweigh  the costs .MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
372
``Elevated  corridor  from  Sirsi  circle  to Nayandahalli
Proposed Elevated rotary at DeepanjalinagarMYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
Figure 321. Proposed Elevated Corridor from Sirsi circle to Nayandahalli on Mysore road
373
``Proposed Elevated Rotary at Deepanjali  Nagar along Mysore road 
An elevated rotary is proposed at the West of Chord Mysore Road junction to manage traffic flow in all four directions. Given  the presence 
of an existing elevated Metro line, the rotary will be ideal for addressing the traffic challenges in the area. This design w ill enable seamless 
movement of vehicles towards Nayandahalli, West of Chord Road, Sirsi  Circle, and the NICE corridor."
West of Chord road
Nayandahalli
NICESirsi CircleNayandahalli
Sirsi CircleMYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
Figure 322. Proposed Elevated Rotary at Deepanjalii Nagar junction on Mysore road 374
``Proposed Elevated Rotary at Deepanjali  Nagar along Mysore road location of Ramps 
Sirsi FlyoverSirsi Flyover
Gouri Palya junction Near Satellite Bus Terminal
Near Gali Anjanaeya  TempleRotary near NICE roadMYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
Figure 323. Site photos of the Proposed Elevated corridor from Sirsi circle to Nayandahalli  on Mysuru 375
``
000
Location of proposed Elevated Rotary 
Location of Start & End point at Existing Nayandahalli FlyoverAt this point  an elevated  rotary  is 
proposed  which  will integrate  all the 
traffic  from  four sides  and help  in 
seamless  traffic  movement . 
The proposed  elevated  corridor  from  
Sirsi  Flyover  terminates  at the existing  
Nayandahalli  Flyover
Figure 324. Site photos of the Proposed 
Elevated corridor from Sirsi circle to 
Nayandahalli  on MysuruMYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
376
Figure 325. Proposed cross section for the Elevated corridor from Sirsi circle to Nayandahalli flyover
Proposed cross 4 lane undivided  Elevated corridor from Sirsi circle to Nayandahalli flyoverMYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
377
Figure 326. Proposed cross section for  Elevated corridor from Sirsi circle to Nayandahalli flyover
Proposed cross 6 lane undivided  Elevated corridor from Shoolay Circle to Silk board on Hosur road MYSORE ROAD
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
378
Swami Vivekananda 
Metro Station
Silk Board 
JunctionCORRIDOR
 10
Old Madras 
Road to Hosur 
Road
Proposed  Elevated  
Corridor  from  Old 
Madras  Road  from   
Swami  
Vivekananda  
Metro  Station  to 
Silk Board  Junction  
on Hosur  road   via 
Indiranagar -
Domlur - Madiwala
Old Madras Road,Vivekananda  Metro Station to Silk Board Junction via Indiranagar -Domlur - Madiwala
MadiwalaDomlurCMH HospitalOld Madras Road
Silk Board
Figure 327.Proposed Elevated corridor from Old Madras road  Swami Vivekananda Metro Station to Silk Board on Hosur RoadOld Madras road to Hosur Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
380
The route  from  Madiwala  to Old Madras  Road  via Domlur  is a major  traffic  corridor  in Bangalore  that 
experiences  significant  congestion,  especially  during  peak  hours . This  route  connects  South  and East Bangalore,  
passing  through  key commercial  and residential  areas,  including  Madiwala,  Koramangala,  Domlur,  and 
Indiranagar,  before  reaching  Old Madras  Road . Here’s  an analysis  of the traffic  conditions  along  this stretch  and 
the factors  contributing  to congestion :
Key Causes of Congestion
1.High  Volume  of Commuter  and Commercial  Traffic : This  route  serves  a large  number  of office -goers,  
especially  since  it connects  major  business  hubs  in Koramangala,  Domlur,  and Indiranagar . With  many  IT 
companies,  commercial  establishments,  and retail  outlets  located  along  the way,  this road  is consistently  busy  
throughout  the day,  with  peak  congestion  during  morning  and evening  commute  hours .
2.Multiple Intersections and Signals : The route from Madiwala to Old Madras Road has numerous intersections 
and traffic signals that disrupt the flow. Key junctions, including St. John’s Hospital junction, Sony World 
junction, EGL (Embassy Golf Links) entrance, and the Domlur flyover, create frequent stop -and-go situations, 
leading to prolonged delays during peak hours.
3.Narrow  Roads  and Lane  Changes : In sections  like Koramangala  and Domlur,  road  widths  are often  insufficient  
to accommodate  the high  traffic  volume,  leading  to frequent  lane changes . The Domlur  flyover  has limited  entry  
and exit lanes,  which  adds  to the bottleneck  as vehicles  converge  from  different  directions .
4.Pedestrian Crossings and Local Traffic : The route has several commercial areas and residential complexes, 
leading to frequent pedestrian crossings and local traffic entering and exiting side streets. This interaction 
between through -traffic and local traffic creates congestion, especially near malls, restaurants, and other popular 
spots in Koramangala and Indiranagar.
5.Mixed  Traffic  with  Public  Transport  Stops : BMTC  buses,  autos,  and cabs  frequently  stop  to pick  up and drop  
off passengers,  adding  to the slowdowns . The stops  are often  close  to intersections  or signal  points,  which  can 
create  bottlenecks,  especially  in busy  areas  like Sony  World  junction  and near  the Domlur  flyover .
6.Ongoing  Infrastructure  Projects  and Construction : Periodic  roadwork,  metro  construction,  and maintenance  
projects  further  reduce  road  space  and create  temporary  diversions  along  this route,  adding  to the congestion .Proposed Elevated Corridor from Old Madras road  to Silk board – Alignment detailsOld Madras road to Hosur Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
381
Proposed Elevated Corridor from Old Madras road  to Silk board – Alignment details
Characteristics  of Traffic  Flow
•Stop -and-Go Movement : The combination  of heavy  traffic  volume,  signals,  and pedestrian  crossings  
leads  to stop -and-go movement  throughout  this stretch,  especially  during  peak  hours . This  pattern  is 
evident  near  major  intersections  like Sony  World  junction  and the Domlur  flyover .
•Peak  Hour  Delays : Morning  and evening  rush  hours  see the highest  congestion,  with  significant  delays  
around  8–11 a.m. and 5–8 p.m. Travel  time  along  this route  can increase  considerably,  especially  on 
Fridays  or during  rainy  weather,  which  slows  down  traffic  further .
•Lane  Merging  at Flyover  Exits : The Domlur  flyover  is a major  bottleneck,  with  vehicles  merging  from  
different  directions  (including  Indiranagar,  Koramangala,  and Inner  Ring  Road) . This  leads  to slower  
movement  as vehicles  attempt  to merge  into limited  lanes .
Potential  Solutions  to Improve  Traffic  Flow
1.Dedicated  Bus Lanes  and Improved  Public  Transport  Options : Creating  dedicated  bus lanes,  where  feasible,  could  improve  the flow  of 
public  transport  and reduce  delays  caused  by buses  stopping  on main  lanes . Additionally,  encouraging  greater  use of metro  services  (once  
the metro  line expands)  could  reduce  road  congestion .
2.Improved  Signal  Coordination  and Adaptive  Traffic  Signals : Using  adaptive  traffic  signals  that adjust  based  on real-time  traffic  
conditions  could  help  manage  congestion  more  effectively,  especially  at intersections  like Sony  World  junction  and the Domlur  flyover .
3.Additional  Pedestrian  Overpasses  and Footpaths : Constructing  pedestrian  overpasses  or underpasses  at high -traffic  pedestrian  points,  
particularly  near  Koramangala  and Domlur,  would  improve  pedestrian  safety  and reduce  the need  for vehicles  to stop  for crossings .
4.Grade  Separation  at Key Junctions : Grade  separation  at critical  junctions  like Sony  World  junction  or constructing  an elevated  corridor  or 
underpass  in heavy  traffic  areas  like Domlur  could  streamline  vehicle  movement  and reduce  the frequency  of stops .
5.Implementation  of One -Way  Systems  Where  Feasible : Implementing  one-way  routes  on some  feeder  roads,  especially  in Koramangala  
and Indiranagar,  could  reduce  conflicts  between  vehicles  entering  and exiting  main  roads,  improving  the overall  flow .
6.Strict  Enforcement  of Parking  Regulations : Illegal  parking  along  the route,  especially  in commercial  areas,  reduces  available  road  space . 
Strict  enforcement  and designated  parking  zones  could  help  free up space,  particularly  in Koramangala  and Indiranagar .
7.Expansion  of Metro  Connectivity : Expediting  the construction  and expansion  of the metro  along  this route  would  provide  a viable  
alternative  for commuters,  reducing  the number  of private  vehicles  on the road  and alleviating  congestion  in the long  term .Old Madras road to Hosur Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
382
Proposed Elevated Corridor from Old Madras road  to Silk board – Alignment details
The traffic  congestion  between  Madiwala  and Old Madras  Road  via Domlur  is largely  due to heavy  commuter  and commercial  traffic,  
varied  vehicle  types,  pedestrian  crossings,  and limited  road  capacity . Long -term  improvements  like expanded  metro  connectivity  and grade  
separation  at key junctions  could  greatly  ease  these  conditions . In the short  term,  measures  such  as dedicated  bus lanes,  coordinated  signals,  
and enhanced  pedestrian  infrastructure  could  help  streamline  traffic  flow .
Additionally,  constructing  an elevated  corridor  along  this route  could  significantly  reduce  congestion . By functioning  as an expressway  for 
through -traffic,  the elevated  corridor  would  alleviate  surface -level  congestion,  enabling  vehicles  to bypass  busy  intersections  and avoid  
frequent  stops,  thus  improving  overall  traffic  movement  and reducing  delays  on this key corridor .
Potential  Benefits  of an Elevated  Corridor
1.Reduced  Traffic  Load  at Surface  Level : An elevated  corridor  would  allow  vehicles,  especially  those  commuting  between  South  
Bangalore  and East Bangalore,  to bypass  crowded  areas  like Koramangala,  Sony  World  junction,  and Domlur  flyover . This  would  reduce  
the number  of vehicles  on surface  roads,  leaving  them  less congested  for local  traffic .
2.Improved  Travel  Time  and Efficiency : An uninterrupted  elevated  corridor  would  provide  a faster  route  with  fewer  stops,  improving  
travel  time  for commuters . Vehicles  could  move  more  efficiently  between  Madiwala  and Old Madras  Road,  especially  during  peak  hours,  
as they  would  avoid  intersections  and signal  stops .
3.Decreased  Bottlenecks  at Key Junctions : Major  bottlenecks  at Sony  World  junction,  EGL,  and the Domlur  flyover  could  be eased,  as 
through -traffic  would  be diverted  above  these  intersections . This  would  prevent  the merging  and lane-changing  issues  that contribute  to 
congestion  at these  points .
4.Enhanced  Public  Transport  Movement : If the elevated  corridor  includes  a dedicated  lane for buses  or allows  BMTC  buses  to use it, it 
could  speed  up public  transport,  making  bus commutes  more  reliable . This  could  encourage  more  people  to use buses  instead  of private  
vehicles,  reducing  surface -level  traffic  further .
5.Reduced  Pollution  and Improved  Air Quality : By reducing  the amount  of stop -and-go traffic  at the surface  level,  an elevated  corridor  
could  help  decrease  idling  time  for vehicles,  which  in turn  would  lower  emissions . Improved  traffic  flow  leads  to better  fuel efficiency  and 
less pollution  in densely  populated  areas  like Koramangala  and Domlur .
6.Better  Pedestrian  Safety : Reduced  congestion  at the surface  level  means  fewer  interactions  between  vehicles  and pedestrians,  especially  
in busy  areas  where  people  frequently  cross  roads . This  could  enhance  pedestrian  safety  and reduce  traffic -related  incidents .Old Madras road to Hosur Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
383
Old Madras Road, Vivekananda Metro Station to Silk Board Junction via Indiranagar -Domlur - Madiwala
Silk Board / 
MadiwalaExisting Ejipura  
Flyover Under 
Construction 
Intermediate 
ring road Domlur 
InterchangeOld Airport 
Elevated 
CorridorYeshwanthapura –
K.R.Puram  Elevated 
Corridor
Proposed Elevated 
rotary at Swami 
Vivekanada  Metro 
Station on Old 
madras roadSplit Flyover on ORR 
( Silk board to Hebbal 
Via K.R.Puram )Old Madras road to Hosur Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
Figure 328. Proposed projects on the Corridor  384
Proposed Elevated Corridor from Old Madras road  to Silk board – Alignment details
The proposed  corridor  will serve  as a crucial  link between  Silk Board  and Old Madras  Road,  traversing  some  of the city's  most  congested  
areas,  including  Madiwala,  Ejipura , Koramangala,  and Indiranagar . It is designed  to connect  with  the ongoing  Ejipura  flyover  project,  
continuing  along  the Intermediate  Inner  Ring  Road,  crossing  the Domlur  interchange,  and taking  a right  near  C.M.H. Hospital . Ultimately,  
the corridor  will merge  with  the elevated  route  on Old Madras  Road  through  an elevated  rotary .
The elevated  corridor  begins  at Silk 
Board,  with  ramps  integrated  into the 
existing  loops  of the Silk Board  
interchangeThe elevated  corridor  makes  its first 
right  turn  at the Madiwala  underpass,  
continuing  along  100 ft RoadThe elevated  corridor  merges  with  the 
ongoing  Ejipura  flyover  construction,  
extending  past Sony  World  Junction  and 
connecting  with  the Intermediate  Inner  Ring  
Road .Old Madras road to Hosur Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
Silk Board
Madiwala UnderpassEjipura
Figure 329. Proposed Project Corridor section wise  details  385
The elevated  corridor  connects  with  the existing  interchange  at Domlur,  as well  as the elevated  corridor  extending  from  Varthur  
to the ASC  Center  on Old Airport  Road . This  will be a significant  interchange,  where  two elevated  corridors  intersect  with  the 
current  infrastructure .Proposed Elevated Corridor from Old Madras road  to Silk board – Alignment detailsOld Madras road to Hosur Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
Old Airport 
Elevated 
Corridor
Old Madras 
road to Silk 
BoardASC
MarathahalliOld Madras 
road
Silk Board
Figure 330. Proposed Project Corridor section wise  details  386
Proposed Elevated Corridor from Old Madras road  to Silk board – Alignment detailsOld Madras road to Hosur Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
Yeshwanthapura –
K.R.Puram  Elevated 
Corridor
Existing Metro Line
Directly  aligning  the elevated  
corridor  with  Old Madras  
Road  is unfeasible  due to the 
existing  metro  line in the 
center  of the road . 
Constructing  the corridor  on 
either  side would  require  
significant  land  acquisition,  
and merging  onto  Old Madras  
Road  is complicated  by the 
differing  heights  of the metro  
line and the Yeshwanthapur -
Old Madras  elevated  corridor,  
which  will be at levels  1 and 2. 
Therefore,  the alignment  is 
planned  to turn  right  onto  
C.M.H. Road .Upon  reaching  C.M. 
Hospital,  the alignment  
turns  right  at Shri Krishna  
Temple,  then  merges  with  
the proposed  elevated  
rotary  on Old Madras  
Road,  marking  the end of 
the corridorProposed Rotary near 
Swami Vivekanada  
Metro Station Old Madras road
CM H ospita ;
Figure 331.Proposed Project 
Corridor section wise  details  
387
A three -arm elevated  rotary  is a circular  traffic  interchange  located  
at an elevated  level,  typically  above  ground,  designed  to manage  
traffic  from  three  connecting  roads  or highways . It functions  
similarly  to a roundabout  but is elevated,  often  built  above  an 
existing  road  network  to manage  traffic  flow  efficiently .
Here’s  how  it works :
1.Three  Arms : This  rotary  connects  three  different  roads  or routes  
that converge  at one point . The traffic  from  each  arm enters  the 
circular  rotary  and can exit onto  any of the other  two connecting  
roads,  ensuring  continuous  movement  without  the need  for 
traditional  intersections  or stoplights .
2.Elevated  Structure : The rotary  is constructed  above  ground,  
allowing  it to handle  traffic  flows  from  multiple  directions  while  
avoiding  the interference  of ground -level  traffic . It is especially  
useful  in busy  urban  areas  or where  there  are multiple  crossing  
points .Proposed Elevated Corridor from Old Madras road  to Silk board – Alignment detailsOld Madras road to Hosur Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
Figure  332..Proposed  
Elevated  Rotary  at 
Swami  Vivekananda  
Metro  Station  On Old 
Madras  Road
Proposed 
Elevated 
RotaryK.R.Puram
Halsuru
DomlurYeshwanthapura –
K.R.Puram  Elevated 
Corridor
Old Madras 
road to Silk 
Board
388
Figure 404. Proposed cross section for the Elevated corridor from Sirsi circle to Nayandahalli flyover
Proposed cross 4 lane undivided  Elevated corridor from Sirsi circle to Nayandahalli flyoverOld Madras road to Hosur Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
389
Figure 333. Proposed cross section for  Elevated corridor from Sirsi circle to Nayandahalli flyover
Proposed cross 6 lane undivided  Elevated corridor from Shoolay Circle to Silk board on Hosur road Old Madras road to Hosur Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
390
Nagawara junctionCORRIDOR
 11 
Thanisandra 
Main Road
Proposed  Elevated  
Corridor  from  
Nagawara  
junction -
Ramakrishna  
HedgedeNagar  
Junction -
Sampigehalli -
Tirumenahalli -
Bellahalli  junction -
Bagalur  main  roadBaglur Main road
Integrated Elevated flyover from Nagawara junction -Ramakrishna HedgedeNagar  Junction -Sampigehalli -
Tirumenahalli -Bellahalli  junction -Bagalur  main road
Nagawara 
Junction on ORRBagalur JunctionNagawara Junction  to Bagalur Main Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
Figure  334.Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  from  Nagawara  junction  on ORR   to Bagalur  Main  road
392
Bagalur Main road
Nagawara junctionThanisandraRamakrishna Hegde
 Nagar TirumenahalliBellahalli  junctionIntegrated Elevated flyover from Nagawara junction -Ramakrishna Hedgede  Nagar Junction -Sampigehalli -
Tirumenahalli -Bellahalli  junction -Bagalur  main road.
The proposed  corridor  will provide  a vital  alternative  
route  between  the Outer  Ring  Road  and Airport  Road . 
Beginning  at the Nagawara  junction  on the Outer  Ring  
Road,  it extends  to Bagalur  Main  Road,  bypassing  
heavily  congested  areas  like Sarai  Palya,  Thannisandra , 
and Hedge  Nagar . Over  time,  this area has seen  
significant  development,  with  the growth  of IT hubs  
such  as Bharatiya  City,  residential  complexes,  and 
institutions  like Reva  University  and KNS  Institute  of 
Technology . Additionally,  facilities  such  as the Haj 
House  and multiple  convention  centers  have  been  
established  here . To accommodate  traffic  demand,  a 10 
km elevated  corridor  is planned,  featuring  several  on- 
and off-ramps  to facilitate  smoother  traffic  flow  and 
better  connectivity  for commuters  along  the route .
Nagawara Junction  to Bagalur Main Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
Figure  335..Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  from  Nagawara  junction  on ORR   to Bagalur  Main  road393
Proposed Elevated Corridor from Nagawara junction to Bagalur - Alignment details
The traffic  scenario  between  Nagawara  and Bagalur  Junction  is complex,  as this stretch  connects  key residential,  commercial,  and industrial  
areas  in North  Bangalore . Here’s  an overview  of the key issues,  typical  traffic  conditions,  and primary  contributing  factors  along  this route :
Key Areas  and Traffic  Flow :
1.Nagawara  Junction :
1. Nagawara  is a busy  intersection  in North  Bangalore,  connecting  Manyata  Tech  Park,  one of the largest  IT hubs  in the city, with  
surrounding  residential  and commercial  areas .
2. This  area sees heavy  congestion,  especially  during  peak  hours,  as thousands  of IT employees  commute  to and from  Manyata  
Tech  Park .
3. Outer  Ring  Road  (ORR)  runs  through  Nagawara  and is a critical  route  for commuters,  connecting  Hebbal  in the west  and KR 
Puram  in the east. This  road  already  has high  vehicle  density,  especially  from  heavy  vehicles,  office -goers,  and local  traffic .
2.Thanisandra  Main  Road :
1. Thanisandra  Main  Road  is a key route  connecting  Nagawara  to Bagalur  Junction,  and it runs  through  several  densely  
populated  residential  areas,  including  developments  like Hegde  Nagar  and Thanisandra .
2. Due to rapid  residential  and commercial  growth  along  Thanisandra  Main  Road,  the volume  of vehicles —particularly  private  
cars,  two-wheelers,  and BMTC  buses —has increased  substantially .
3. The road  is narrow  in some  sections,  with  frequent  bottlenecks  caused  by local  markets,  bus stops,  and intersections . The lack of 
adequate  service  roads  and narrow  lanes  leads  to congestion  during  peak  hours .
3.Hegde  Nagar  and Kothanur :
1. As you move  further  along  Thanisandra  Main  Road,  Hegde  Nagar  and Kothanur  are residential  hubs  with  many  apartment  
complexes,  schools,  and shopping  areas,  which  contribute  to local  traffic .
2. These  areas  are also served  by BMTC  buses,  and frequent  bus stops  slow  down  traffic  as vehicles  have  to wait  for passengers .
3. Traffic  is often  slower  here,  especially  in the mornings  and evenings,  as residents  and school  buses  join the flow .
4.Bagalur  Junction :
1. Bagalur  Junction  is a strategic  point,  serving  as a link between  Thanisandra,  Hennur  Road,  and the road  towards  the 
Kempegowda  International  Airport .
2. It attracts  a mix of local  traffic,  airport -bound  vehicles,  and heavy  trucks  due to its industrial  and commercial  activity .
3. Merging  and turning  movements  at this junction  cause  delays,  particularly  with  the presence  of heavy  vehicles . The narrow  
roads  around  Bagalur  Junction  often  create  bottlenecks,  leading  to traffic  buildup .Nagawara Junction  to Bagalur Main Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
394
Proposed Elevated Corridor from Nagawara junction to Bagalur - Alignment details
Major  Traffic  Challenges :
1.High  Vehicle  Volume :
1. The entire  stretch  from  Nagawara  to Bagalur  sees a high  volume  of traffic,  as it serves  as a major  connection  between  
residential  areas,  Manyata  Tech  Park,  and the airport  route .
2. During  peak  hours,  the concentration  of IT employees  commuting  to Manyata  Tech  Park  and back  home  adds  significant  
pressure  to the roads,  especially  at Nagawara  Junction  and on Thanisandra  Main  Road .
2.Narrow  and Poorly  Maintained  Roads :
1. Thanisandra  Main  Road  is not fully  equipped  to handle  the high  density  of traffic  it currently  supports . In some  sections,  it is 
narrow,  lacks  proper  markings,  and has potholes,  which  slows  down  vehicles .
2. The lack of service  roads  in many  parts  means  that local  traffic,  including  autos,  buses,  and private  vehicles,  often  share  the 
same  lanes,  leading  to congestion  and slower  travel  times .
3.Frequent  Intersections  and U-Turns :
1. This  route  has multiple  intersections,  U-turns,  and pedestrian  crossings,  especially  around  Hegde  Nagar,  Kothanur , and 
Bagalur  Junction .
2. These  frequent  crossings  create  traffic  interruptions,  as vehicles  often  slow  down  to let pedestrians  cross  or to navigate  turning  
vehicles .
4.Lack  of Adequate  Public  Transport  Infrastructure :
1. While  BMTC  buses  operate  along  this route,  the frequency  may  not fully  meet  the demand . Many  people  rely on private  
vehicles  or ride-hailing  services,  increasing  the vehicle  count .
2. Insufficient  bus stops  and waiting  areas  also contribute  to traffic  slowing  down,  as passengers  board  and alight  on the main  
road .
5.Heavy  Vehicles :
1. Due to its proximity  to industrial  areas,  Bagalur  Junction  sees many  heavy  vehicles,  which  impact  traffic  flow  by occupying  
more  road  space  and moving  at slower  speeds .
2. The lack of dedicated  lanes  for heavy  vehicles  on Thanisandra  Main  Road  and at Bagalur  Junction  creates  delays  and 
bottlenecks,  especially  as trucks  often  have  difficulty  maneuvering  in tight  spaces .Nagawara Junction  to Bagalur Main Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
395
Nagawara 
junction
Bagalur Main road
Airport RoadOuter Ring road
Kogilu  main roadBellahalli  junction
Proposed Elevated CorridorRailway LineProposed Elevated Corridor from Nagawara junction to Bagalur - Alignment detailsNagawara Junction  to Bagalur Main Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
Figure  336.Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  from  Nagawara  junction  on ORR   to Bagalur  Main  road
396
Proposed Elevated Corridor from Nagawara junction to Bagalur - Alignment detailsNagawara Junction  to Bagalur Main Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
The elevated  corridor  starts  at 
Nagawara  junction,  featuring  a split  
flyover  and separate  ramps  
connecting  from  the at-grade  level  
near  Elements  Mall .The elevated  corridor  veers  right  near  
the Thanisandra  petrol  station,  with  a 
down  ramp  provided  just before  the 
railway  overbridge  (ROB) .A down  ramp  is also provided  just 
before  the Hegde  Nagar  flyover .
Nagawara Junction Hegde Nagar Flyover RoB - Thanisandra Main rd
Figure 337 Proposed Project Corridor section wise  details  397
Proposed Elevated Corridor from Nagawara junction to Bagalur - Alignment detailsNagawara Junction  to Bagalur Main Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
Down  ramp  is provided  at Vibgyor  
School  road  & Up ramp  near  Police  
training  center
Down  ramp  is provided  before  
Bellahalli  junctionUp ramp  & Down  ramp  is provided  
before  Bagalur  junction  and takes  the 
right  turn  to terminate  on Bagalur  
main  road
Vibgyor  SchoolBellahalli  Junction Baglur Main road
Figure 338. Proposed Project Corridor section wise  details  398
Figure 339. Proposed cross section for the Elevated corridor from Nagawara junction to Baglur main road
Nagawara Junction  to Bagalur Main Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan Proposed  6 lane divided  Elevated corridor from Nagawara to Bagalur main road 
399
Figure 340. Proposed cross section for the Elevated corridor from Nagawara junction to Baglur main road
Proposed 6 lane divided  Elevated corridor from Shoolay Circle to Silk board on Hosur road Nagawara Junction  to Bagalur Main Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
400
Proposed Elevated Corridor from Nagawara junction to Bagalur - Alignment details
An elevated  corridor  from  Nagawara  to Bagalur  Junction  could  significantly  help  in reducing  traffic  congestion  along  this busy  route . 
This  corridor  would  provide  a direct,  uninterrupted  path  for vehicles  traveling  between  these  two points,  which  could  greatly  relieve  the 
existing  congestion  on Thanisandra  Main  Road  and surrounding  areas . Here’s  how  and why  it would  help :
Benefits  of an Elevated  Corridor  from  Nagawara  to Bagalur  Junction :
1.Bypassing  Major  Congestion  Points :
1. The elevated  corridor  would  bypass  traffic -heavy  intersections,  such  as Nagawara  Junction , Thanisandra , and Bagalur  
Junction , reducing  wait  times  and allowing  for smoother,  faster  travel .
2. Many  of the bottlenecks  along  Thanisandra  Main  Road  are due to local  traffic,  pedestrians,  and intersections . An elevated  
route  would  allow  through -traffic  to bypass  these  problem  areas  entirely .
2.Dedicated  Route  for Through -Traffic :
1. The elevated  corridor  would  serve  as a dedicated  route  for through -traffic,  particularly  for commuters  traveling  to and from  
Manyata  Tech  Park , nearby  residential  hubs,  and the airport  route .
2. This  would  help  separate  long -distance  traffic  from  local  traffic  on the ground  level,  allowing  both  types  of traffic  to move  
more  efficiently .
3.Reduction  in Surface -Level  Congestion :
1. Local  and residential  traffic  would  have  more  room  on the surface  roads  without  the added  burden  of through -traffic . This  
would  result  in reduced  congestion  on Thanisandra  Main  Road , making  it easier  for buses,  local  vehicles,  and pedestrians  to 
navigate .
2. With  less congestion  on the ground  level,  buses  and other  public  transport  options  could  operate  more  smoothly,  potentially  
encouraging  more  people  to use them .
4.Improved  Access  to Manyata  Tech  Park  and Airport :
1. Manyata  Tech  Park  is a major  destination  for commuters  in the area,  and an elevated  corridor  could  provide  faster,  more  
reliable  access  for thousands  of employees .
2. Additionally,  an elevated  route  could  benefit  those  traveling  toward  the Kempegowda  International  Airport  by creating  a 
more  direct  path,  minimizing  delays  caused  by local  traffic  and intersections .
5.Faster  Travel  Times  and Reduced  Commute  Stress :
1. By providing  a faster  and more  direct  route,  the elevated  corridor  would  reduce  travel  times  between  Nagawara  and 
Bagalur,  leading  to less stress  for commuters  and potentially  boosting  productivity  for those  working  in nearby  tech parks .
2. Faster  travel  times  would  also make  the area more  attractive  for residential  and commercial  development,  as connectivity  
improves .Nagawara Junction  to Bagalur Main Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
401
Proposed Elevated Corridor from Nagawara junction to Bagalur - Alignment details
Key Considerations  for the Elevated  Corridor’s  Success :
1.Strategic  Placement  of Entry  and Exit Ramps :
1. To ensure  maximum  effectiveness,  entry  and exit points  would  need  to be strategically  placed  at key locations,  like 
Nagawara , Thanisandra , Hegde  Nagar , and Bagalur  Junction .
2. Proper  ramp  placement  would  allow  seamless  access  to the elevated  corridor,  without  creating  new  congestion  points  at 
entry/exit  ramps .
2.Integration  with  Public  Transport :
1. The elevated  corridor  should  be well-integrated  with  BMTC  bus routes  and other  forms  of public  transport  to encourage  
more  people  to opt for public  transit .
2. Proper  connections  to the metro,  if extended  toward  Nagawara,  would  also help  decongest  surface  roads .
3.Managing  Heavy  Vehicles  and Commercial  Traffic :
1. If designed  with  dedicated  lanes  or restrictions  for heavy  vehicles,  the elevated  corridor  could  better  manage  the flow  of 
trucks,  particularly  near  Bagalur  Junction  and other  industrial  areas .
2. Restrictions  on surface  roads  for heavy  vehicles,  during  peak  hours,  could  also further  reduce  congestion .
4.Minimizing  Disruptions  During  Construction :
1. Constructing  an elevated  corridor  on an already  
2. oute  would  require  well -planned  traffic  management  strategies  to prevent  construction  from  causing  major  disruptions .
3. Phased  construction  and alternative  routes  would  be necessary  to keep  traffic  flowing  smoothly  during  the project .
5.Supportive  Infrastructure  on Surface  Roads :
1. While  the elevated  corridor  would  alleviate  congestion  for through -traffic,  surface -level  improvements,  like better  pedestrian  
crossings,  signal  management,  and road  widening  at key points,  would  still be necessary  to support  local  traffic .
2. Proper  lane markings,  signage,  and intersection  upgrades  on Thanisandra  Main  Road  would  enhance  the impact  of the 
elevated  corridor  on overall  traffic  flow .
Overall  Impact :
An elevated  corridor  from  Nagawara  to Bagalur  Junction  would  likely  be a highly  effective  solution  for decongesting  this route . It would  
create  a faster,  more  reliable  path  for commuters  and through -traffic,  ease the burden  on Thanisandra  Main  Road,  and improve  the 
efficiency  of public  transport . By reducing  congestion,  this corridor  would  also improve  air quality  and road  safety  in the area,  benefiting  
both  commuters  and local  residents .
In summary,  with  careful  planning  and strategic  implementation,  an elevated  corridor  between  Nagawara  and Bagalur  Junction  could  be a 
transformative  infrastructure  project,  providing  long -term  relief  from  traffic  congestion  and supporting  the area’s  continued  growth  and 
development .Nagawara Junction  to Bagalur Main Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
402
Thalghattapura  
Nice road.MarenahalliRagi GuddaCORRIDOR
12
Marenahalli 
Pipe Line 
Road
Proposed  Elevated  
Corridor  from  
Maraenahalli  main  
road   from  Ragi  
Gudda  to 7th main  
junction  thereby  
connecting  
Kanakapura  main  
road  till 
Thalghattapura  Nice  
road  via Pipe  Line  
road.
Marenahalli , Pipe  Line Road  - Nice Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan Elevated Corridor from Marenahalli main road connecting Kanakapura main road -Thalghattapura  Nice road
The proposed  corridor  will offer  an essential  alternative  route  from  Bangalore  to Kanakapura  Road . Starting  from  Jayanagar  4th main  
road  on Pipeline  road,  it runs  diagonally  toward  Kanakapura  Road,  ending  at the NICE  junction  near  Thalaghattapura . Spanning  
approximately  10 kilometers,  this corridor  will benefit  commuters  from  areas  like Thurahalli , Kumaraswamy  Layout,  Lingadeeranahalli , 
and ISKCON .
Figure  341.Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  from  Marenahalli  Piple  Line road to Nice Road   Thalghattapura 404
Marenahalli
Thalghattapura  
Nice road.Yelachenahalli
Konankuntae Cross
Doddakallasandra
Ragi Gudda
Proposed Elevated Corridor from  Ragi Gudda junction to 7th main road - Alignment detailsMarenahalli , Pipe  Line Road  - Nice Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
Figure  342.Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  from  Marenahalli  Pipe  Line  road  to Nice  Road   ThalghattapuraIn addition  to the main  elevated  corridor  extending  from  Marenahalli  to Thalaghattapura  NICE  Road,  a proposal  has been  made  to extend  
the existing  double -decker  Metro  line from  Ragi  Gudda  Junction  to 7th Main  on Marenahalli  Road . This  extension  aims  to ease  traffic  at two 
major  intersections  where  significant  congestion  frequently  occurs,  as illustrated  in the figure  414.
405
Ragi Gudda junction7th Main
Proposed 600 meters extension of Existing Double Decker flyover
Proposed Elevated Corridor from  Ragigudda  junction to 7th main road - Alignment details
Construction of Flyover from Ragi Gudda Metro Station to 7th Main Road integrating Double Decker Flyover 
Traffic near Raghavendra Swamy Mutt at J.P. Nagar in BBMP South Zone Limit. 
The traffic  scenario  from  Ragigudda  (near  Jayanagar)  to 7th Main  in Bangalore  can vary  quite  a bit depending  on the time  of day and 
ongoing  roadwork  or events .
1.Morning  (8–10 AM) : This  route  typically  sees moderate  to heavy  traffic,  especially  around  the Jayadeva  Flyover  and Bannerghatta  Road,  
as people  are commuting  to work . The smaller  lanes  in Jayanagar,  like 7th Main,  can get congested  due to school  traffic  and local  
commercial  activity .
2.Afternoon  (12–3 PM) : The traffic  is usually  lighter  compared  to the morning  and evening  peaks,  though  construction  or lane restrictions  
might  cause  slight  delays  near  major  intersections .
3.Evening  (5–8 PM) : Traffic  is generally  heavy  again  due to the evening  commute,  especially  along  main  stretches  like Bannerghatta  Road  
and near  Jayadeva  Hospital . 7th Main  can also get crowded  as people  shop  and dine  out in Jayanagar .
4.Late  Evening  (after  8 PM) : Traffic  is lighter,  though  popular  restaurants  and shops  in Jayanagar  contribute  to some  crowding  around  7th 
Main  until  closing  hours .
Marenahalli , Pipe  Line Road  - Nice Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
406
An elevated  corridor  from  Ragigudda  to 7th Cross  could  significantly  help  with  decongestion,  especially  during  peak  hours . Elevated  
corridors  help  by providing  a dedicated,  uninterrupted  pathway  that bypasses  ground -level  traffic  and intersections,  reducing  travel  time  
and easing  congestion  on the main  roads  below .
Here's  how  it could  specifically  improve  the flow :
1.Bypassing  Key Bottlenecks : This  area sees congestion  around  the Jayadeva  Flyover,  9th Block,  and Bannerghatta  Road  intersections . An 
elevated  route  would  allow  vehicles  to bypass  these  congested  spots  entirely,  especially  benefiting  those  commuting  long  distances  who  
don't  need  to stop  along  the way .
2.Reduced  Local  Traffic  Impact : By diverting  through -traffic  to the elevated  corridor,  the local  streets  below,  like 7th Main  and smaller  
roads  in Jayanagar,  could  see reduced  congestion,  making  it easier  for residents  and businesses  to move  about .
3.Improved  Public  Transport  Efficiency : If buses  and other  public  transport  vehicles  use the elevated  corridor,  it could  enhance  the 
reliability  of transit  times,  reducing  the overall  pressure  on the local  roads .Proposed Elevated Corridor from  Ragigudda  junction to 7th main road - Alignment details
Marenahalli , Pipe  Line Road  - Nice Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
407
Proposed Elevated Corridor from  Marenahalli main road to Thalghattapura  Nice road - Alignment details
The existing  Double  decker  is extended  from  Ragi  Gudda  junction  to 7th main  road  this will bypass  Three  intersections  the detail  
alignment  is as shown  in the figure  belowMarenahalli , Pipe  Line Road  - Nice Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
Ragi Gudda junction
7th Main
Figure 344. Typical cross section of the proposed flyover Figure 343.Alignment details of the proposed flyover from ragu Gudda to 7th Main on Marenahalli road
408
Proposed Elevated Corridor from  Marenahalli main road to Thalghattapura  Nice road - Alignment details
The traffic  scenario  between  Marenahalli  and Thalaghattapura  NICE  (Nandi  Infrastructure  Corridor  Enterprises)  Junction  is challenging  
due to the mix of residential,  commercial,  and industrial  traffic,  as well  as the impact  of heavy  vehicles  using  the NICE  Ring  Road . Here’s  a 
breakdown  of the current  traffic  conditions  and key issues  along  this stretch :
Key Areas  and Traffic  Flow :
1.Marenahalli  Junction :
1. Located  near  Kanakapura  Road,  Marenahalli  Junction  is a busy  area that connects  several  residential  neighborhoods  to main  
roads,  especially  Kanakapura  Road .
2. The area experiences  heavy  traffic  during  peak  hours  due to local  residents,  buses,  and vehicles  heading  towards  commercial  
areas .
3. The intersection  is particularly  congested  due to limited  road  width,  high  vehicle  volumes,  and lack of alternative  routes  for 
local  traffic .
2.Kanakapura  Road  (NH -209):
1. Kanakapura  Road  is one of the main  arterial  roads  in South  Bangalore  and serves  as a key connection  between  central  parts  of 
Bangalore  and the southern  outskirts .
2. This  stretch  of Kanakapura  Road  is a mixture  of dense  residential  areas,  educational  institutions,  and commercial  
establishments,  which  lead  to significant  traffic  volumes,  especially  during  morning  and evening  peak  hours .
3. The road  frequently  faces  congestion,  particularly  near  intersections,  bus stops,  and pedestrian  crossings,  slowing  down  overall  
traffic  flow .
3.Thalaghattapura  NICE  Junction :
1. The NICE  Junction  at Thalaghattapura  is a critical  point  where  Kanakapura  Road  intersects  with  the NICE  Ring  Road .
2. The NICE  Road  serves  as a bypass  around  Bangalore,  attracting  a high  volume  of heavy  trucks  and commercial  vehicles,  which  
adds  to congestion  at this junction .
3. During  peak  hours,  vehicles  from  Kanakapura  Road  merge  with  the traffic  on NICE  Road,  causing  delays . The limited  space  
and merging  of vehicles  from  multiple  directions  result  in bottlenecks,  especially  for those  accessing  NICE  Road  from  
Kanakapura  Road .
4.NICE  Road  Traffic :
1. The NICE  Ring  Road  is a high -speed  expressway  connecting  several  key points  around  Bangalore,  attracting  heavy  vehicle  
traffic,  including  trucks,  due to its convenience  as a bypass  route .
2. The section  around  Thalaghattapura  is frequently  used  by vehicles  heading  toward  Mysore  Road,  Bannerghatta  Road,  and 
Tumkur  Road .
3. NICE  Road  users  entering  or exiting  at Thalaghattapura  often  encounter  slow -moving  traffic,  especially  during  peak  hours  
when  merging  can be difficult  due to the high  volume  of vehicles .Marenahalli , Pipe  Line Road  - Nice Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
409
Proposed Elevated Corridor from  Marenahalli main road to Thalghattapura  Nice road - Alignment details
Main  Issues  Contributing  to Traffic  Congestion :
1.High  Traffic  Volume :
1. Kanakapura  Road  and Marenahalli  see a steady  flow  of vehicles,  including  private  cars,  two-wheelers,  BMTC  buses,  and auto -
rickshaws . The high  density  of vehicles  contributes  to congestion,  especially  as the road  approaches  the NICE  Junction .
2. NICE  Road  also carries  a large  volume  of heavy  trucks,  which  reduces  the pace  of traffic  flow  and causes  congestion  at entry  
and exit points  like Thalaghattapura .
2.Narrow  Roads  and Limited  Infrastructure :
1. Kanakapura  Road  in some  sections  is still relatively  narrow  and not fully  equipped  to handle  the current  volume  of vehicles . 
The lack of service  roads,  adequate  lane width,  and proper  pedestrian  crossings  leads  to slow  traffic  movement .
2. The narrow  lanes  at Marenahalli  Junction  and on stretches  approaching  Thalaghattapura  further  exacerbate  congestion,  
especially  during  peak  hours .
3.Merging  Traffic  at NICE  Junction :
1. The NICE  Junction  at Thalaghattapura  is a key point  where  traffic  from  NICE  Road  and Kanakapura  Road  converges,  leading  
to frequent  bottlenecks .
2. The merging  of vehicles  from  NICE  Road  onto  Kanakapura  Road  (and  vice versa)  is often  chaotic,  as vehicles  must  slow  down  
significantly  to navigate  this area .
4.Peak  Hour  Pressure :
1. During  morning  and evening  rush  hours,  traffic  volumes  increase  significantly,  as many  commuters  use Kanakapura  Road  to 
travel  to and from  the city. Traffic  slows  down  substantially  during  these  hours,  with  vehicles  moving  at a crawl  at key 
intersections  like Marenahalli .
2. The pressure  of office  commuters,  school  buses,  and local  vehicles  adds  to the congestion .
5.Pedestrian  and Local  Traffic :
1. Kanakapura  Road  has a high  volume  of pedestrian  traffic,  with  many  people  crossing  the road  at various  points  to access  local  
markets,  schools,  and other  amenities . Vehicles  often  slow  down  for pedestrians,  which  affects  traffic  flow .
2. The lack of pedestrian  infrastructure,  such  as foot overbridges  or underpasses,  means  that pedestrian  crossings  are frequent  
and often  unsafe,  further  slowing  down  vehicular  traffic .Marenahalli , Pipe  Line Road  - Nice Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
410
Thalghattapura  
Nice road.MarenahalliMarenahalli Pipe Line RoadMarenahalli , Pipe  Line Road  - Nice Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
Proposed Elevated Corridor from  Marenahalli main road to Thalghattapura  Nice road - Alignment details
An elevated  corridor  along  Pipeline  Road  could  help  relieve  traffic  congestion  between  Marenahalli  and Thalaghattapura  NICE  Junction . 
This  corridor  would  effectively  create  a new,  high -capacity  route  for through -traffic,  helping  to ease the burden  on Kanakapura  Road  and 
surrounding  roads . Here’s  a breakdown  of how  it would  help  and the potential  benefits  and considerations :
Benefits  of an Elevated  Corridor  on Pipeline  Road :
1.Bypassing  Major  Bottlenecks :
1. Pipeline  Road  currently  serves  as an alternative  route,  but it gets congested  due to its narrow  lanes  and intersections  with  local  
roads . An elevated  corridor  would  bypass  these  bottlenecks,  allowing  for faster,  uninterrupted  travel  from  Marenahalli  to 
Thalaghattapura .
2. The elevated  corridor  would  especially  help  bypass  congested  points  at busy  intersections  and junctions  along  Kanakapura  
Road,  particularly  at Marenahalli  and Thalaghattapura  NICE  Junction .
2.Diverting  Through -Traffic  from  Local  Roads :
1. By providing  a dedicated  elevated  route,  the corridor  could  divert  through -traffic,  especially  vehicles  that do not need  to stop 
along  Kanakapura  Road  or Pipeline  Road,  away  from  surface  roads .
2. This  would  reduce  congestion  on both  Kanakapura  Road  and Pipeline  Road,  allowing  surface  roads  to handle  local  traffic  more  
efficiently .
3.Reducing  Pressure  on Kanakapura  Road :
1. Kanakapura  Road  is heavily  used,  especially  during  peak  hours,  as it connects  Bangalore  city with  the southern  outskirts . An 
elevated  corridor  on Pipeline  Road  would  provide  an alternative  for vehicles  looking  to reach  NICE  Road  and areas  beyond .
2. By creating  an alternative  route,  the elevated  corridor  would  reduce  the volume  of vehicles  using  Kanakapura  Road,  which  in 
turn  would  reduce  delays,  improve  travel  time,  and create  a safer  environment  for pedestrians  and local  vehicles  on the ground  
level .
4.Faster  Access  to NICE  Road :
1. For vehicles  needing  to access  NICE  Road,  the elevated  corridor  would  provide  a faster,  more  direct  connection . This  could  
help  reduce  traffic  at the Thalaghattapura  NICE  Junction,  where  merging  traffic  often  leads  to congestion .
2. With  direct  ramps  or access  points  to NICE  Road,  vehicles  can bypass  the busy  intersections  and avoid  merging  delays,  leading  
to smoother  traffic  flow  on both  NICE  Road  and the surface  roads  below .
5.Supporting  Future  Growth :
1. The areas  around  Marenahalli,  Kanakapura  Road,  and Thalaghattapura  are experiencing  rapid  residential  and commercial  
development . An elevated  corridor  would  help  support  the increased  traffic  demand  from  this growth,  providing  additional  
capacity  and reducing  pressure  on existing  infrastructure .
2. A new  elevated  route  would  also improve  connectivity  to nearby  neighborhoods  and business  hubs,  helping  distribute  traffic  
load  more  effectively  across  the area.Marenahalli , Pipe  Line Road  - Nice Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
412
Proposed Elevated Corridor from  Marenahalli main road to Thalghattapura  Nice road - Alignment details
Considerations  for the Elevated  Corridor’s  Effectiveness :
1.Strategic  Access  Ramps :
1. The elevated  corridor  would  need  carefully  planned  access  ramps  at key points  to ensure  smooth  entry  and exit, particularly  
near  Marenahalli,  important  intersections  along  Pipeline  Road,  and Thalaghattapura  NICE  Junction .
2. Proper  ramp  placement  is crucial ; if not well -designed,  ramps  can create  new  congestion  points  or shift  traffic  issues  to 
different  areas .
2.Integration  with  Existing  Road  Infrastructure :
1. The corridor  should  be well -integrated  with  Kanakapura  Road,  NICE  Road,  and surrounding  local  roads . Proper  signage,  lane 
markings,  and traffic  signals  would  be necessary  to guide  vehicles  seamlessly  onto  the elevated  route  and prevent  confusion  at 
entry/exit  points .
2. Effective  coordination  with  ongoing  infrastructure  projects,  such  as metro  expansions  or road  widening,  would  be important  
to avoid  construction  conflicts  and ensure  smooth  traffic  flow .
3.Impact  on Local  Roads  During  Construction :
1. Constructing  an elevated  corridor  along  Pipeline  Road  may  temporarily  impact  traffic  flow  and increase  congestion  in 
surrounding  areas . This  would  require  phased  construction  and traffic  management  strategies  to minimize  disruption .
2. Coordinated  efforts  with  local  authorities  and clear  communication  with  the public  regarding  construction  schedules  and 
alternative  routes  would  help  mitigate  short -term  traffic  issues .
4.Managing  Traffic  on Surface  Roads  Post -Completion :
1. While  the elevated  corridor  would  alleviate  through -traffic,  ground -level  roads  like Pipeline  Road  and Kanakapura  Road  
would  still need  improvements  to manage  local  traffic  effectively .
2. Enhanced  traffic  management  at intersections,  improved  pedestrian  infrastructure,  and potentially  restricting  certain  types  of 
vehicles  (e.g., heavy  trucks)  from  surface  roads  during  peak  hours  would  help  maximize  the benefits  of the elevated  corridor .
5.Long -Term  Traffic  Planning :
1. While  the elevated  corridor  would  provide  relief,  additional  planning  may  be needed  to accommodate  future  traffic  growth . 
Coordinating  with  other  infrastructure  projects,  like expanding  public  transport  (e.g., metro,  BMTC  services),  and adding  
service  roads  would  further  support  long -term  traffic  management  in the area .Marenahalli , Pipe  Line Road  - Nice Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
413
Proposed Elevated Corridor from  Marenahalli main road to Thalghattapura  Nice road - Alignment detailsMarenahalli , Pipe  Line Road  - Nice Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
The elevated  corridor  begins  at Marenahalli  Main  Road,  
where  two metro  corridors  intersect  near  Jayanagar  4th 
Main  Road . The proposed  corridor  will be built  along  the 
existing  pipeline  route .4th cross Junction Jayanagar
The proposed  elevated  corridor  crosses  over  both  
Kanakapura  Main  Road  and the metro  line.Kanakapura Road
Figure 345.Proposed Elevated corridor section wise details 414
Proposed Elevated Corridor from  Marenahalli main road to Thalghattapura  Nice road - Alignment detailsMarenahalli , Pipe  Line Road  - Nice Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
The proposed  elevated  corridor  crosses  over  the double  
decker  and crossing  the outer  ring road
The proposed  elevated  corridor  crosses  Vasanthapura  
main  road
Outer Ring Road Outer Ring Road
Figure 346..Proposed Elevated corridor section wise details 415
Proposed Elevated Corridor from  Marenahalli main road to Thalghattapura  Nice road - Alignment detailsMarenahalli , Pipe  Line Road  - Nice Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
The proposed  elevated  corridor  crosses  Gubbala  main  
roadThe proposed  elevated  corridor  crosses  the 80 feet roadGubbala  Main road 80 Feet Road
Figure 347. Proposed Elevated corridor section wise details416
Proposed Elevated Corridor from  Marenahalli main road to Thalghattapura  Nice road - Alignment details
The proposed  elevated  corridor  crosses  100 ft road  at 
Thalghattapura .The proposed  elevated  corridor  crosses  NICE  road  and 
gets terminated
Marenahalli , Pipe  Line Road  - Nice Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
100Feet road Thalaghattapura
 NICE road Thalaghattapura
Figure 348.Proposed Elevated corridor section wise details 417
Figure 349. Proposed cross section for the Elevated corridor from Marenahalli main road to Thalghattapura  Nice road 
Proposed  4 lane divided  Elevated corridor from from  Marenahalli main road to Thalghattapura  Nice road Marenahalli , Pipe  Line Road  - Nice Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
418
Figure 350. Proposed cross section for the Elevated corridor from Marenahalli main road to Thalghattapura  Nice road 
Proposed 6 lane divided  Elevated corridor from from  Marenahalli main road to Thalghattapura  Nice road Marenahalli , Pipe  Line Road  - Nice Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
419
Bagalur
HennurCORRIDOR
 13
Hennur -
Bagalur  Main 
Road
Proposed  
Additional  link  
road  to KIA,  
Elevated  Corridor   
from  Outer  Ring 
Road – Hennur  
main  road  
junction  to 
Bagalur  Junction
 
Proposed Elevated Corridor from  Hennur to Bagalur - Alignment details
Bagalur
HennurThe proposed  corridor  will provide  a vital  alternative  route  between  the 
Outer  Ring  Road  and Airport  Road . Beginning  at the Hennur   junction  on 
the Outer  Ring  Road,  it extends  to Bagalur,  bypassing  heavily  congested  
areas  like Byrathi,Kothanur,Chikkagubbi,Hennur  etc. Along  with  this it 
crossess  one primary  drain  bridge  and a RoB which  are the bottle  necks .. 
Over  time,  this area  has seen  significant  development,  with  the growth  of IT 
hubs  such  as y, residential  complexes,  and institutions .. To accommodate  
traffic  demand,  a 15 km elevated  corridor  is planned,  featuring  several  on- 
and off-ramps  to facilitate  smoother  traffic  flow  and better  connectivity  for 
commuters  along  the route .
Hennur -Bagalur Main road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
Figure 351.Alignment of the proposed Elevated corridor from Hennur to Bagalur 421
Proposed Elevated Corridor from  Hennur to Bagalur - Alignment details
The traffic  scenario  between  Hennur  and Bagalur  is relatively  less congested  compared  to central  Bangalore  routes  like Silk Board  to 
Hebbal . However,  this stretch  is becoming  busier  due to rapid  development,  with  increasing  residential,  commercial,  and industrial  
projects,  especially  as it connects  parts  of North  Bangalore  and emerging  suburban  areas . Here’s  a breakdown  of the traffic  conditions  along  
this route :
1.Hennur  Road : Hennur  Road  (or Hennur  Main  Road)  begins  near  Outer  Ring  Road  (ORR)  and extends  northward . The initial  stretch  near  
ORR  can experience  moderate  traffic  during  peak  hours,  primarily  due to local  commuters,  nearby  residential  complexes,  and schools . The 
development  of IT parks  and residential  areas  along  Hennur  Road  has contributed  to increased  traffic,  though  it is still more  manageable  
compared  to other  main  roads  in Bangalore .
2.Hennur -Bagalur  Cross : This  intersection  is one of the key points  along  this route  and can have  moderate  congestion,  especially  during  
rush  hours . The traffic  here  is influenced  by both  local  commuter  vehicles  and goods  vehicles  heading  to various  industries  and warehouses  
in the northern  suburbs . However,  since  it’s less developed  compared  to central  junctions  in Bangalore,  traffic  usually  flows  smoothly  
outside  peak  hours .
3.Hennur -Bagalur  Road : The stretch  from  Hennur  to Bagalur  goes  through  semi -urban  areas  and farmland,  making  it less congested  in 
comparison  to city roads . It serves  as a connection  between  various  residential  projects  and is used  by vehicles  traveling  towards  
Kempegowda  International  Airport  from  eastern  parts  of the city. Though  relatively  free-flowing,  there  is increasing  traffic  due to 
construction  projects  and new  residential  layouts . Heavy  vehicles,  including  trucks  supplying  construction  materials,  use this route,  leading  
to occasional  slowdowns .
4.Bagalur  Road : As you approach  Bagalur,  traffic  becomes  lighter . Bagalur  itself  is still developing,  with  a mixture  of residential  areas  and 
open  spaces,  and lacks  the kind  of dense  infrastructure  that causes  bottlenecks  in central  Bangalore . However,  ongoing  development  and 
roadwork  can create  some  temporary  disruptions .
Challenges :
•Infrastructure  Development : With  ongoing  construction  and new  residential  developments,  this area may  see worsening  congestion  over  
time  if infrastructure  does  not keep  pace  with  growth .
•Heavy  Vehicle  Movement : Increasing  movement  of goods  vehicles,  especially  construction  trucks,  can create  slowdowns  and affect  road  
quality .
•Road  Conditions : Some  stretches  of Hennur -Bagalur  Road  may  have  uneven  surfaces  or need  repairs,  causing  occasional  delays  and 
affecting  vehicle  flow .Hennur -Bagalur Main road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
422
Proposed Elevated Corridor from  Hennur to Bagalur - Alignment details
An elevated  corridor  from  Hennur  to Bagalur  could  indeed  help  alleviate  traffic  congestion  on this route,  especially  given  the increasing  
development  in North  Bangalore . However,  the effectiveness  of such  a project  would  depend  on several  factors,  including  the design,  
integration  with  existing  infrastructure,  and management  of traffic  flow  in surrounding  areas . Here’s  a breakdown  of how  an elevated  
corridor  could  impact  traffic  and potential  considerations :
Potential  Benefits :
1.Bypassing  Local  Traffic : An elevated  corridor  would  allow  through -traffic,  especially  vehicles  headed  toward  the airport  or other  
northern  suburbs,  to bypass  local  traffic  on the ground . This  separation  of local  and through -traffic  could  reduce  bottlenecks  on the main  
road,  allowing  faster  travel  for both  local  commuters  and those  heading  beyond  Bagalur .
2.Reducing  Heavy  Vehicle  Interference : Many  construction  and goods  vehicles  use the Hennur -Bagalur  road,  often  slowing  down  
regular  traffic . An elevated  corridor  would  provide  an alternative  route,  keeping  heavy  vehicles  off the main  surface  road,  thereby  
reducing  congestion  for local  and light -vehicle  traffic .
3.Improving  Connectivity : An elevated  corridor  could  significantly  reduce  travel  times  between  Hennur,  Bagalur,  and further  toward  the 
airport  or Bellary  Road . This  could  make  the route  more  attractive  for daily  commuters  and reduce  the load  on other  major  roads  like 
Bellary  Road  (NH -44), which  connects  the airport  to central  Bangalore .
4.Facilitating  Future  Development : With  North  Bangalore’s  rapid  growth,  this elevated  corridor  could  support  new  residential  and 
commercial  projects  without  further  straining  existing  road  infrastructure . This  may  also help  attract  more  businesses,  leading  to well-
managed  development  in the region .Hennur -Bagalur Main road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
423
Proposed Elevated Corridor from  Hennur to Bagalur - Alignment details
Challenges  and Considerations :
1.Intersections  and Ramps : To maximize  effectiveness,  the corridor  would  need  strategically  placed  entry  and exit ramps  at key 
locations  (e.g., near  residential  or commercial  hubs  along  the Hennur -Bagalur  route) . Poorly  planned  ramps  could  lead to congestion  at 
entry  and exit points,  especially  during  peak  hours .
2.Connecting  to Outer  Ring  Road  (ORR) : Since  Hennur  connects  with  the ORR,  proper  integration  is essential . If the elevated  corridor  
lacks  efficient  connections  to ORR  or major  intersections,  traffic  could  still back  up at these  points,  diminishing  the corridor’s  overall  
effectiveness .
3.Capacity  Planning : North  Bangalore’s  development  is accelerating,  and an elevated  corridor  designed  with  current  traffic  volumes  in 
mind  could  quickly  become  insufficient . It would  need  to be built  with  a vision  for future  traffic  demand  to ensure  it remains  effective  
over  the next  decade .
4.Construction  Disruption : During  the construction  phase,  the elevated  corridor  project  could  temporarily  worsen  traffic  congestion  on 
the Hennur -Bagalur  road . Detailed  planning  and phased  construction  could  mitigate  this, but it would  still require  careful  traffic  
management  to minimize  the impact  on commuters .
5.Last-Mile  Connectivity : For commuters  whose  destinations  are not directly  on the corridor,  last-mile  connectivity  options  such  as 
feeder  roads,  bus services,  or metro  links  would  still be necessary . Without  these,  commuters  may  face congestion  at the start  or end of 
their  journey  despite  the elevated  corridor .
Long -Term  Outlook
In combination  with  other  infrastructure  improvements,  like expanded  public  transportation  (such  as metro  extensions)  and improved  
road  quality,  an elevated  corridor  could  have  a significant  positive  impact  on traffic  congestion  along  this route . However,  it is likely  
only  part of the solution . For long -term  effectiveness,  a comprehensive  approach  that includes  better  ground -level  road  management,  
public  transportation  options,  and integration  with  surrounding  infrastructure  will be necessary .
Ultimately,  while  an elevated  corridor  from  Hennur  to Bagalur  could  relieve  congestion,  it would  be most  effective  as part of a broader  
plan  to enhance  connectivity  across  North  Bangalore .Hennur -Bagalur Main road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
424
Hennur -Bagalur Main road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan Proposed Elevated Corridor from  Hennur to Bagalur - Alignment details
Elevated  corridor  starts  from  Hennur  junction
It merges  with  the Split  elevated  corridor  on 
Outer  ring road .
Corridor  cross   Primary  drain  and a RoB along  the route
Hennur junctionRoB & drain on Hennur road
RoB on Hennur road
Drain on Hennur road Hennur junction
Figure 352.Proposed Elevated corridor section wise details 425
Hennur -Bagalur Main road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
Elevated  corridor  takes  right  at  Narayanpura  Junction  to 
continue  on Hebbal -Bagalur  main  road
Elevated  corridor  reaches  Bagalur  junction  and terminates  
after  crossing  the village  limits .Narayanpura   junction
Narayanpura   junction Baglur  junctionBaglur  junction
Figure 353.Proposed Elevated corridor section wise details426
Figure 354. Proposed cross section for the Elevated corridor from Hennur to Baglur Main road
Proposed  4 lane divided  Elevated corridor from Hennur junction to Baglur Main road
5 Hennur -Bagalur Main road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
427
Figure 355. Proposed cross section for the Elevated corridor from Hennur junction to Baglur main road
 5Proposed  6 lane divided  Elevated corridor from Hennur junction to Baglur main roadHennur -Bagalur Main road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
428
M.M. RoadNagawara Junction
CORRIDOR
 14
TANNERY 
ROAD
Proposed Elevated 
corridor from 
Madava  Mudiliyar 
road to Nagawara 
Junction
Tannery Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
430The traffic situation on Tannery Road up to Nagawara Junction  is a chronic issue due to several factors, including high population 
density, narrow roads, encroachments, and increasing vehicular volume. Below is a detailed breakdown:
1.Road Infrastructure
▪Narrow Roads : Tannery Road is notoriously narrow, often insufficient to handle the volume of vehicles during peak hours. This 
results in frequent bottlenecks.
▪Encroachments : Shops, vendors, and parked vehicles encroach on the already narrow road, further reducing usable road width 
and exacerbating traffic congestion.
▪Lack of Proper Footpaths : Pedestrians often spill onto the road due to inadequate sidewalks, adding to vehicular movement 
challenges.
2. Traffic Volume
▪High Vehicle Density : This stretch connects several densely populated areas such as DJ Halli, KG Halli, and Nagawara. Auto -
rickshaws, two -wheelers, buses, and private cars dominate the road.
▪Commercial Traffic : Many small businesses and local markets in the area lead to increased goods transportation, which worsens 
the congestion.
3. Key Traffic Junctions and Bottlenecks
▪Pottery Town and MM Road Junction : These intersections see frequent jams, especially during office hours and weekends.
▪Nagawara Junction : Being a major junction leading to areas like Manyata Tech Park and ORR, this point experiences gridlock 
during rush hours.
4. Public  Transport  Impact
•Bus Stops  on the Main  Road : BMTC  buses  frequently  stop  on the road,  disrupting  the already  slow -moving  traffic .
•Auto -rickshaws : Autos  often  stop  without  warning  to pick  up or drop  passengers,  causing  abrupt  delays .
5.  Event -Based Restrictions and Impact
▪Processions and Celebrations : Religious festivals like Eid Milad and Ganesh Chaturthi often lead to temporary road closures or 
diversions, severely affecting traffic flow.
▪Political Rallies and Protests : This area has seen disruptions due to demonstrations or rallies.
6. Ongoing Challenges
▪Road Repairs : Potholes and uneven surfaces add to the slow pace of traffic, particularly during the rainy season.
▪Construction Work : Any civic work or pipeline repairs often lead to partial road closures.
Tannery Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
431Constructing  an elevated  corridor  from  Pottery  Town  to Nagawara  could  significantly  alleviate  traffic  congestion  along  Tannery  
Road  and surrounding  areas . Here’s  a detailed  analysis  of its potential  benefits  and challenges :
Potential  Benefits
1. Decongestion  of Surface  Roads
•Tannery  Road's  Limited  Capacity : Tannery  Road  is narrow,  with  encroachments  and mixed  traffic  (buses,  autos,  two-wheelers,  
and pedestrians) . An elevated  corridor  would  provide  a faster,  dedicated  route  for through -traffic,  bypassing  these  choke  points .
•Ease  Traffic  at Key Junctions : Major  intersections  like Pottery  Town,  DJ Halli,  KG Halli,  and Nagawara  Junction  often  
experience  gridlock . The elevated  corridor  could  offer  relief  by diverting  long -distance  and through -traffic .
2. Faster  Connectivity
•Improved  Commute  Times : The elevated  road  would  enable  quicker  travel  between  Pottery  Town  and Nagawara,  bypassing  
multiple  traffic  signals  and bottlenecks .
•Access  to Outer  Ring  Road  and Tech  Parks : Manyata  Tech  Park  and other  ORR  destinations  could  be accessed  more  efficiently,  
reducing  delays  for commuters  and businesses .
3. Reduction  in Pollution
•Minimized  Idling : By reducing  the stop -and-go movement  on the ground,  the elevated  road  could  lower  vehicle  emissions,  
improving  air quality  in the area.
4. Economic  Benefits
•Boost  to Local  Economy : Efficient  traffic  flow  can attract  businesses  and improve  logistics  for local  traders .
•Enhanced  Real  Estate  Value : Areas  near  the elevated  corridor  may  see increased  property  demand  due to better  connectivity .
5. Complementing  Upcoming  Metro  Lines
•The Nagawara  Metro  Station  (part  of Bengaluru  Metro  Phase  2B) could  synergize  with  the elevated  corridor,  creating  an 
integrated  transport  network  for better  commuter  dispersal .
Tannery Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
432
Nagawara Junction
M.M. RoadProposed Elevated corridor Alignment 
The proposed  corridor  begins  at Madava  Mudiliyar  Road  on the southern  
end and extends  to Nagawara  Junction  on the Outer  Ring  Road  (ORR)  in the 
north . The up ramp  starts  at the beginning  of M.M. Road  and crosses  the 
railway  line at level  one. It then  traverses  Tannery  Road , a narrow  two-lane 
stretch,  up to the D.J. Halli  Junction . From  there,  the corridor  turns  right  onto  
Arabic  College  Road , which  offers  a wider  12-meter  carriageway . Moving  
forward,  it crosses  another  at-grade  railway  line near  HBR  Layout  and 
continues  along  Nagawara  Main  Road . This  section  has several  choke  points  
where  the road  width  abruptly  reduces  from  12 meters  to 7 meters,  leading  to 
traffic  jams  during  peak  hours . Variations  in road  width  persist  until  
Nagawara  Junction , where  the road  narrows  further,  resulting  in significant  
congestion  and vehicle  queueing  near  the junction .
This  corridor  is one of the busiest  routes  connecting  the Central  Business  
District  (CBD)  to the Outer  Ring  Road  (ORR) . Additionally,  an underground  
metro  line is planned  and currently  under  construction  along  this stretch . The 
proposed  elevated  corridor , spanning  5.5 kilometers , aims  to facilitate  long -
distance  travelers  by significantly  reducing  travel  time  and ensuring  a 
congestion -free commute .
The current  Volume -to-Capacity  (V/C)  ratio  along  the corridor  has exceeded  
2, and the Level  of Service  (LOS)  has deteriorated  to F, indicating  severe  
congestion . This  highlights  the urgent  need  for a long -term  solution  to 
address  the growing  traffic  demand . However,  with  the underground  metro  
under  construction,  a comprehensive  analysis  must  be conducted  as part of 
the Detailed  Project  Report  (DPR)  to effectively  plan  the elevated  corridor .
Figure 356. Proposed elevated corridor from MM road to Nagawar  junction
Tannery Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
433Proposed Alignment details
The proposed  elevated  corridor  begins  just before  
the Madava  Mudiliyar  (M.M.) Road  intersection  
and proceeds  to cross  the existing  railway  line at 
level  one near  the Pottery  Town  intersection , as 
illustrated  in the accompanying  figure . This  
alignment  ensures  minimal  disruption  to surface  
traffic  while  effectively  addressing  the bottlenecks  
caused  by the railway  crossing . The design  aims  to 
streamline  traffic  flow,  particularly  at key 
junctions,  and provide  seamless  connectivity  along  
the corridor .
Starting point where the Up ramp is proposed Railway line at level one
Starting point of 
Elevated corridorRailway line 
at level oneM.M. RoadTannery Road
Figure 357. Proposed elevated corridor from MM road to Nagawar  junction
Tannery Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
434
Arabic College RoadShampura  road
D.J halli  road
Proposed 
Elevated corridor
Arabic College Road
 Shampura  road
D.J halli  road
The elevated  corridor  reaches  D.J. Halli  Junction,  where  it 
takes  a right  turn  onto  Arabic  College  Road  and continues  
toward  Nagawara  Junction . Beyond  this point,  the road  
width  increases  to 12 meters  and above . However,  due to the 
ongoing  Metro  construction  work  and the barricades  set up 
by the Metro  authorities,  the effective  road  width  has been  
reduced,  resulting  in significant  traffic  congestion .
Figure 358. Proposed elevated corridor from MM road to Nagawar  junction
Tannery Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
435
Railway line at Grade
Proposed Elevated 
corridorRailway line 
at level oneThe proposed  elevated  corridor  crosses  another  railway  line at 
grade  and continues  along  Nagawara  Main  Road . This  section  faces  
significant  traffic  challenges,  particularly  at the railway  crossing,  
which  serves  as a major  congestion  point . Long  traffic  queues  form  
whenever  the railway  gate is closed  for passing  trains ."
The proposed  elevated  corridor   moves  on Nagawara  main  
road  and at this stretch  the carriageway  width  varies  from  12 
meters  to less than  7 meters  resulting  in traffic  congestion  at 
every  choke  points .
Choke Points
Choke Points
Proposed Elevated 
corridor
Figure 359. Proposed elevated corridor from MM road to Nagawar  junction
Tannery Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
436
Proposed Elevated 
corridorExisting Flyover on 
ORR Nagawara Junction
"The  proposed  elevated  corridor  concludes  at Nagawara  
Junction,  connecting  with  the Outer  Ring  Road . Before  
reaching  Nagawara  Junction,  the road  narrows  significantly,  
leading  to traffic  congestion  and long  queue  lengths . To 
address  this issue,  land  acquisition  will be necessary  along  
various  stretches  where  the road  width  is insufficient .Proposed Alignment details
Figure 360. Proposed elevated corridor from MM road to Nagawar  junction
Proposed  4 lane divided  Elevated corridor from Hennur junction to Baglur Main road
5437Tannery Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
Figure 361. Proposed cross section for the Elevated corridor from M.M road to Nagawara junction
437
Figure 362. Proposed cross section for the Elevated corridor from M.M road to Nagawara junction
 5Proposed  6 lane divided  Elevated corridor from Hennur junction to Baglur main road
438Tannery Road
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
438
Yelahanka Old townKogilu  Cross KIA RoadCORRIDOR
 15
YELAHANKA 
NEW TOWN 
MAIN ROAD
Proposed  
Elevated  
corridor  from  
Yelahanka  Old 
Town  to 
Kempegowda  
International  
Airport  road .
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Yelahanka Main road – Elevated Corridor
Yelahanka Old townKogilu  Cross KIA RoadProposed Elevated corridor from Yelahanka Old Town to Kempe Gowda  International Airport road  – 4 kms
440Figure 363. Proposed Elevated corridor from Yelahanka Old Town to Kempe Gowda 
International Airport road 
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Yelahanka Main road – Elevated CorridorThe traffic  scenario  on Yelahanka  Main  Road,  particularly  the stretch  from  the Police  Station  Circle  to Kogilu  Cross,  is 
characterized  by significant  congestion  due to several  factors :
Key Traffic  Issues :
1.High  Traffic  Volume :
1. This  stretch  serves  as a major  arterial  road  connecting  Yelahanka  to Kogilu  Cross  and further  to the 
Kempegowda  International  Airport .
2. It experiences  heavy  vehicular  traffic  throughout  the day,  including  cars,  buses,  two-wheelers,  and goods  
vehicles .
2.Choke  Points :
1. The Police  Station  Circle  is a key junction  with  multiple  roads  converging,  leading  to frequent  bottlenecks .
2. Kogilu  Cross,  being  a major  intersection,  adds  to the congestion  due to merging  traffic  from  different  
directions .
3.Encroachments :
1. Encroachments  along  the roadside  reduce  the effective  carriageway  width,  further  worsening  traffic  flow .
4.Narrow  Road  Sections :
1. Certain  sections  of Yelahanka  Main  Road  are relatively  narrow,  which  cannot  efficiently  handle  the volume  of 
traffic,  especially  during  peak  hours .
5. Pedestrian  Movement :
•Lack  of adequate  pedestrian  crossings  and footpaths  forces  pedestrians  to cross  the road  haphazardly,  adding  to the traffic  chaos .
6. Commercial  Activities :
1.Shops,  markets,  and street  vendors  along  the road  generate  additional  vehicular  and pedestrian  activity,  contributing  
to slow -moving  traffic .
7. Signalized  Intersections :
1.Traffic  signals  at key junctions  often  result  in long  queue  lengths  during  peak  hours  due to inadequate  signal  timing  
and high  vehicle  density .
8. Public  Transportation  Stops :
1.Bus stops  located  near  junctions  or in narrow  road  sections  lead  to frequent  stops  and disruptions  in the traffic  flow .
441
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Yelahanka Main road – Elevated CorridorPeak  Hour  Traffic :
•Morning  peak  hours  see heavy  outbound  traffic  towards  the airport  and IT corridors .
•Evening  peak  hours  witness  heavy  inbound  traffic  as commuters  return  home .
Suggested  Solutions :
1.Road  Widening :
1. Acquire  land  where  necessary  to expand  the road  and increase  its capacity .
2.Traffic  Signal  Optimization :
1. Improve  signal  coordination  and implement  adaptive  traffic  management  systems .
3.Dedicated  Lanes :
1. Introduce  dedicated  bus and two-wheeler  lanes  to streamline  traffic  movement .
4.Pedestrian  Infrastructure :
1. Build  proper  footpaths  and pedestrian  crossings  to reduce  pedestrian -related  disruptions .
5.Grade  Separation :
1. Construct  flyovers  or underpasses  at critical  intersections  like Kogilu  Cross  to allow  smoother  flow .
6.Relocation  of Bus Stops :
1. Relocate  bus stops  to less congested  areas  and provide  proper  bays  to prevent  buses  from  blocking  lanes .
By addressing  these  issues  with  focused  infrastructure  upgrades  and traffic  management  strategies,  the stretch  from  
Police  Station  Circle  to Kogilu  Cross  can witness  a significant  reduction  in congestion  and smoother  traffic  flow .
442
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Yelahanka Main road – Elevated CorridorConstructing  an elevated  corridor  on Yelahanka  Main  Road  can address  several  traffic  issues,  but its effectiveness  depends  on 
careful  planning  and integration  with  existing  infrastructure . Here's  an analysis  of its potential  impact :
Benefits  of an Elevated  Corridor :
1.Bypassing  Congested  Intersections :
•The elevated  corridor  would  allow  through -traffic  to bypass  key choke  points  like Police  Station  Circle  and Kogilu  Cross,  
significantly  reducing  delays  at ground  level .
2.Increased  Road  Capacity :
•By adding  an additional  level  for traffic,  the corridor  would  effectively  double  the road's  capacity,  accommodating  more  
vehicles  during  peak  hours .
3.Reduced  Travel  Time :
•Commuters  traveling  long  distances  (e.g., towards  Kempegowda  International  Airport  or IT hubs)  would  benefit  from  
uninterrupted  traffic  flow,  leading  to shorter  travel  times .
4.Segregation  of Traffic :
•Heavy  and long -distance  traffic  can use the elevated  corridor,  while  local  traffic  remains  on the ground  level,  leading  to 
better  traffic  management .
5.Minimizing  Land  Acquisition :
•Unlike  road  widening,  which  often  requires  significant  land  acquisition,  an elevated  corridor  can be constructed  within  
the existing  road  alignment,  reducing  displacement  and legal  hurdles .
6.Enhanced  Safety :
•Pedestrian  and local  vehicle  safety  can improve  as the elevated  corridor  would  reduce  conflicts  between  fast-moving  
vehicles  and ground -level  users .
443
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Yelahanka Main road – Elevated CorridorChallenges to Address:
1.Local Traffic Congestion :
•While the elevated corridor will benefit through -traffic, local congestion at ground level (e.g., near markets, bus stops, and 
residential areas) may persist unless additional measures are implemented.
2.Cost and Time :
•Elevated corridors are expensive and time -consuming to construct. Traffic disruptions during construction can exacerbate 
congestion temporarily.
3.Integration with Existing Infrastructure :
•The corridor must seamlessly integrate with junctions, flyovers, and other roads at both entry and exit points to avoid 
creating new bottlenecks.
4.Access for Local Traffic :
•The elevated corridor will primarily serve long -distance travelers. Local commuters might not benefit directly, 
necessitating parallel improvements to the ground -level road.
5.Maintenance and Environmental Concerns :
•Elevated structures require ongoing maintenance, and their construction might impact the environment or nearby 
properties.
Conclusion :
An elevated corridor on Yelahanka Main Road can significantly alleviate through -traffic congestion and improve overall traffic 
efficiency, especially for long -distance and airport -bound commuters. However, to comprehensively solve traffic issues, it shoul d 
be complemented with improvements at ground level and other multimodal transport solutions.
444444
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Yelahanka Main road – Elevated Corridor
Photos along the proposed Elevated corridor Alignment
445Figure 364. Proposed Elevated corridor from Yelahanka 
Old Town to Kempe Gowda International Airport road 
Airport raadYelahanka Old Town
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Yelahanka Main road – Elevated CorridorExisting railway Line
Proposed Elevated 
corridor
The proposed  elevated  corridor  mentioned  starts  from  Yelahanka  police  station  and extends  4 kilometers  towards  Kogilu  Cross . It 
is planned  to cross  a significant  railway  junction  and terminate  at Kogilu  Junction,  connecting  to the Airport  corridor . This  project  is 
likely  intended  to streamline  traffic  flow  in the area and provide  improved  connectivity  to the airport .
446Figure 365. Proposed Elevated corridor from Yelahanka Old Town to Kempe Gowda International Airport road 
Proposed  4 lane divided  Elevated corridor from Hennur junction to Baglur Main road
5447
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Yelahanka Main road – Elevated Corridor
Figure 366. Proposed cross section for the Elevated corridor from Yelahanka Old Town to Kogilu  cross
447
Figure 367. Proposed cross section for the Elevated corridor from Yelahanka Old Town to Kogilu  cross
 5Proposed  6 lane divided  Elevated corridor from Hennur junction to Baglur main road
448
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Yelahanka Main road – Elevated Corridor
448
ORRWest of Chord roadCORRIDOR
 16
WEST OF 
CHORD 
ROAD
Proposed  
Elevated  
corridor  from  
West  of Chord  
Road  to Outer  
Ring  road  via 
Pipe  Line  road  
(Nandini  
Layout) .
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan West of Chord Road – Elevated Corridor
ORRWest of Chord roadProposed  Elevated  corridor  from  West  of Chord  Road  to Outer  Ring  road  via Pipe  Line  road  
(Nandini  Layout )- 4.5 Kms
450Figure 368. Elevated corridor from West of Chord Road to Outer Ring road via Pipe Line road (Nandini Layout
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan West of Chord Road – Elevated CorridorThe traffic  scenario  from  West  of Chord  Road  to ORR  (Outer  Ring  Road)  via Pipeline  Road  depends  on the specific  area you are 
referring  to, but I can provide  a general  overview  of the route  and typical  traffic  conditions  in the region .
1. Starting  Point : West  of Chord  Road
•Chord  Road  is a major  road  in Bangalore,  connecting  areas  like Malleswaram , Rajajinagar , and Vijayanagar  to other  parts  of the city. 
The western  side of Chord  Road  generally  includes  localities  such  as Basaveshwaranagar , Ravindra  Kalakshetra , and parts  of 
Vijayanagar .
•Traffic  Flow : Traffic  on this stretch  can be congested,  particularly  during  peak  hours  (morning  and evening),  as it's a densely  populated  
area with  a mix of residential,  commercial,  and institutional  traffic .
2. Heading  towards  Pipeline  Road
•Pipeline  Road  runs  parallel  to Chord  Road  in the western  part of Bangalore . It is a vital  road  that connects  localities  like Kaval  
Byrasandra , West  of Chord  Road , and Bengaluru  North  with  nearby  areas  like Mathikere , Yeshwanthpur , and eventually  with  Outer  
Ring  Road  (ORR) .
•Traffic  Flow  on Pipeline  Road : The stretch  of Pipeline  Road  can get busy  due to the mix of residential  areas,  commercial  establishments,  
and intersections  leading  to key roads . However,  the traffic  is usually  less dense  compared  to the main  arterial  roads  like Chord  Road,  
although  bottlenecks  can occur  at intersections,  especially  if the road  narrows  or there  are traffic  signals .
3. Approaching  the Outer  Ring  Road  (ORR)
•Outer  Ring  Road  is a significant  road  that encircles  the city, providing  connectivity  to various  IT hubs,  business  districts,  and residential  
areas . There  are multiple  entry  points  to ORR,  but traveling  from  Pipeline  Road  typically  connects  you to the North  or West  stretch  of the 
ORR,  near  areas  like Nagawara , Bellandur , or Hebbal .
•Traffic  Flow  on ORR : The ORR  experiences  varying  traffic  conditions  depending  on the time  of day. During  peak  hours,  heavy  traffic  
congestion  is common,  especially  near  key junctions  like Hebbal , KR Puram , or Whitefield . However,  once  you are on ORR,  the roads  are 
generally  wide,  and traffic  moves  faster  unless  there's  an accident,  construction,  or a bottleneck  at a junction .
General  Observations
•Peak  Hours : Traffic  congestion  on both  Chord  Road  and Pipeline  Road  increases  significantly  during  peak  hours  (8-10 AM and 5-7 PM),  
with  slow -moving  vehicles  and occasional  jams  at major  intersections .
•Alternatives : If there  is heavy  traffic,  alternate  routes  through  areas  like Yeshwanthpur  or Malleswaram  may  offer  a smoother  ride,  but 
this can vary  based  on the time  of day.
•Infrastructure  Development : Over  the years,  there  have  been  significant  improvements  to infrastructure  in the region,  such  as flyovers  
and underpasses,  which  help  reduce  traffic  bottlenecks  in some  areas . However,  roadwork  or new  developments  can still lead to 
disruptions  at times .
Conclusion
In summary,  while  the route  from  West  of Chord  Road  to ORR  via Pipeline  Road  is generally  straightforward,  traffic  conditions  depend  
largely  on the time  of day,  with  congestion  being  the most  severe  during  peak  traffic  hours . The key issues  to watch  out for are:
•Heavy  traffic  on Chord  Road  and around  major  intersections .
•Potential  slowdowns  on Pipeline  Road  due to residential  and commercial  traffic .
•Busy  traffic  conditions  on ORR,  particularly  at junctions .
451
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan West of Chord Road – Elevated Corridor
Photos along the proposed Corrdidor  from West of chord road to ORR
452Figure 369. Elevated corridor from West of Chord Road to Outer Ring road via Pipe Line road (Nandini Layout
Proposed  4 lane divided  Elevated corridor from Hennur junction to Baglur Main road
5453 Figure 370. Proposed cross section for the Elevated corridor from West of Chord road to ORR
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan West of Chord Road – Elevated Corridor
453
5Proposed  6 lane divided  Elevated corridor from Hennur junction to Baglur main road
454
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan West of Chord Road – Elevated Corridor
Figure 371. Proposed cross section for the Elevated corridor from West of Chord road to ORR
454
Kadabagere  HosahalliCORRIDOR
 01
Magadi  Road
Proposed  Double  
Decker  Elevated  
corridor  with  Metro  
line  from  Hosahalli  
to Kadabagere  cross  
along  Magadi  road  
crossing  ORR  and 
NICE  corridor .
DOUBLE  DECKER  INTEGRATED  WITH  BMRCL  - METRO
HosahalliKadabagere  Proposed Double DeckerNICE roadOuter Ring RoadMagadi road - Hosahalli to Kadabagere
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan Proposed Double Decke r Corridor from Hosahalli to Kadabagere  cross near Seegehalli  along Magadi 
road 
The proposed  double -decker  corridor  along  Magadi  Road  spans  approximately  12.5 km, beginning  at Hosahalli  and 
ending  near  Kadabagere  Cross . It traverses  major  densely  populated  and congested  areas  such  as the southern  part of 
Basaveshwaranagar , the northern  side of Vijayanagar,  Sunkadakatte , and Tavarekere , before  reaching  Seegehalli . Along  its 
route,  it crosses  the Outer  Ring  Road  near  Summanahalli  and NICE  Road . The corridor  features  a road  width  that varies  
between  4-lane and 6-lane divided  carriageways,  designed  to accommodate  the area's  traffic  demands .
456Figure 372. Proposed Double Decke r Corridor from Hosahalli to Kadabagere  cross near Seegehalli  along Magadi road 
Magadi road - Hosahalli to Kadabagere
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan The stretch  from  Hosahalli  to Seegehalli  along  Magadi  Road  in Bangalore  experiences  varying  traffic  conditions,  primarily  influenced  by 
the time  of day,  ongoing  infrastructure  development,  and local  activities . Here's  an overview  of the key factors  affecting  this route :
1. Traffic  Patterns
•Peak  Hours  (8:00–11:00 AM and 5:00–8:00 PM) : Traffic  congestion  is generally  heavy  during  these  times  due to commuting  patterns . 
Residents  traveling  toward  the city center  or returning  to suburban  areas  contribute  to significant  slowdowns .
•Off-Peak  Hours : During  the middle  of the day or late at night,  traffic  flow  tends  to improve,  though  occasional  bottlenecks  can still occur  
near  marketplaces  or intersections .
2. Key Contributors  to Traffic
•Urbanization  and Construction : The Magadi  Road  corridor  has seen  significant  residential  and commercial  development,  leading  to 
increased  vehicle  density .
•Narrow  Roads  and Encroachments : Certain  stretches  of Magadi  Road  are narrower,  and encroachments  by vendors  or parked  vehicles  
exacerbate  the problem .
•Intersections  and Traffic  Signals : Key junctions,  such  as those  near  Tavarekere  or local  market  areas,  often  witness  slow -moving  traffic  
due to inefficient  traffic  management .
•Public  Transport  Stops : The presence  of BMTC  bus stops  can cause  localized  congestion  when  buses  block  lanes  for passenger  boarding  
and alighting .
3. Ongoing  Issues
•Road  Conditions : Potholes  or uneven  road  surfaces,  particularly  during  or after  the monsoon,  can slow  down  traffic .
•Heavy  Vehicles : Magadi  Road  serves  as a link for trucks  and goods  vehicles  traveling  to industrial  areas,  contributing  to slower  traffic  
movement,  especially  during  the day.
4. Potential  Solutions
•Road  Widening  Projects : Expanding  narrow  stretches  could  help  accommodate  increasing  traffic  volumes .
•Signal  Optimization : Synchronizing  traffic  signals  can help  reduce  waiting  times  at junctions .
•Public  Transport  Improvements : Increasing  the frequency  and efficiency  of buses  could  encourage  a shift  from  private  vehicles,  easing  
congestion .
•Flyovers  or Underpasses : Infrastructure  upgrades  at major  junctions  could  help  segregate  through  traffic  from  local  traffic,  minimizing  
delays .
. METRO  extension  with  flyover  i.e Double  Decker  along  the Magadi  road .
Current  Scenario
Real -time  traffic  information  suggests  that conditions  vary  daily,  depending  on external  factors  like weather,  events,  or accidents . If you'd  
like, I can provide  real-time  updates  on traffic  for this route .
457
Magadi road - Hosahalli to Kadabagere
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 1. Current  Challenges  Along  Magadi  Road
•Traffic  Congestion : The road  caters  to mixed  traffic —private  vehicles,  buses,  heavy  trucks,  and two-wheelers —leading  to frequent  
bottlenecks,  especially  during  peak  hours .
•Lack  of Rapid  Transit  Options : Despite  BMTC  services,  there  is no high -capacity  transit  option,  making  private  vehicle  dependency  
high .
•Road  Geometry : The existing  road  is not designed  to handle  increasing  traffic  volumes  due to rapid  urbanization .
•Environmental  and Safety  Concerns : Emissions  from  vehicles  and road  safety  issues  are critical  problems .
2.Proposal : Metro  with  a Flyover
A metro  line along  Magadi  Road,  integrated  with  a flyover,  would  combine  mass  rapid  transit  with  improved  road  infrastructure . 
Here's  how  it could  work :
Metro
•Elevated  Metro  Line : A metro  line constructed  above  Magadi  Road  would  reduce  ground -level  disruption  during  construction  and 
avoid  acquiring  large  swathes  of land .
•Stations : Strategically  placed  metro  stations  (e.g., Hosahalli,  Kamakshipalya , Sunkadakatte , Seegehalli ) would  provide  convenient  
access  for commuters .
•Reduction  in Private  Vehicle  Dependency : A metro  line can significantly  reduce  the number  of cars and two-wheelers  on the road,  
cutting  congestion  and emissions .
Flyover
•Dedicated  Traffic  Segregation : A multi -lane flyover  beneath  the metro  line would  allow  uninterrupted  movement  of through -
traffic,  reducing  delays  caused  by intersections  and local  traffic .
•Grade  Separation : Vehicles  needing  to bypass  congested  areas  like Tavarekere  or market  zones  could  use the flyover,  leaving  
surface  roads  for local  commuters  and buses .
458
Magadi road - Hosahalli to Kadabagere
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 3. Benefits  of the Proposal
Traffic  Decongestion
•Reduced  Travel  Time : The combination  of the metro  and flyover  would  streamline  traffic  and provide  faster  travel  alternatives .
•Reduced  Mixed  Traffic : Public  transport  users  shift  to the metro,  heavy  vehicles  can be routed  to designated  lanes  or times,  and 
local  traffic  uses  surface  roads .
Environmental  Impact
•Lower  Emissions : With  reduced  private  vehicle  usage  and improved  traffic  flow,  pollution  levels  would  drop  significantly .
•Sustainability : A metro  is energy -efficient  and contributes  to long -term  sustainable  urban  development .
Urban  Development
•Increased  Accessibility : The metro  would  improve  connectivity  between  suburban  and urban  areas,  encouraging  residential  and 
commercial  development .
•Real  Estate  Growth : Enhanced  infrastructure  often  drives  property  value  appreciation  in nearby  areas .
Safety  and Livability
•Fewer  Accidents : Improved  road  design,  grade  separation,  and reduced  congestion  contribute  to safer  conditions  for drivers  and 
pedestrians .
•Better  Public  Transport  Access : Integration  of metro  stations  with  BMTC  services  and last-mile  connectivity  options  like auto -
rickshaws,  shared  cabs,  or cycle  tracks  would  improve  the overall  commuter  experience .
4. Long -Term  Impacts
•Traffic  Flow : A metro  with  a flyover  would  ensure  a steady  reduction  in traffic  congestion  even  with  future  growth  in population  
and vehicle  ownership .
•Economic  Growth : Enhanced  connectivity  would  boost  local  businesses,  increase  job opportunities,  and make  the area more  
attractive  for investment .
•Urban  Sprawl  Control : By connecting  suburbs  like Seegehalli  to the city efficiently,  urban  sprawl  could  be managed  better,  reducing  
pressure  on the city's  core.459
Magadi road - Hosahalli to Kadabagere
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
460 Figure 373. Proposed Double Decke r Corridor from Hosahalli to Kadabagere  cross near Seegehalli  along Magadi road 
Magadi road - Hosahalli to Kadabagere
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan 
Figure 374.  Typical Cross Section of Double Decker 461
Magadi road - Hosahalli to Kadabagere
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan The corridor  begins  at Hosahalli,  
near  the junction  of Chord  Road  
and Magadi  Road,  close  to the 
Balagangadharanatha  Swamiji  
Metro  Station . From  this 
intersection,  it turns  left onto  
Magadi  Road  and proceeds  
toward  the Outer  Ring  Road .
Start Point
Balagangadharanatha  
Swamiji Metro Station.Magadi 
road
Chord road
The corridor  crosses  the Outer  Ring  
Road  at a key junction  near  the 
Summanahalli  Flyover,  which  serves  
as a critical  point  for connectivity . 
This  crossing  facilitates  the integration  
of traffic  between  the Outer  Ring  
Road  and the corridor,  helping  to 
streamline  vehicular  movement  in this 
highly  congested  area. The 
Summanahalli  Flyover  acts as an 
important  link,  reducing  delays  and 
improving  access  to other  parts  of the 
city.
Outer Ring 
Road
Proposed Double Decker
462Figure 375. Proposed Double Decke r Corridor from 
Hosahalli to Kadabagere  cross near Seegehalli  along 
Magadi road 
Proposed Double Decker
Proposed Double Decker
End PointMagadi road - Hosahalli to Kadabagere
 Comprehensive Traffic Management  Plan The corridor  intersects  with  the NICE  (Nandi  
Infrastructure  Corridor  Enterprises)  Road  near  
Bydarahalli  Layout,  creating  an essential  
junction  that enhances  connectivity  between  
the two major  routes . From  this intersection,  
the corridor  continues  its path,  moving  
through  the suburban  regions,  and progresses  
toward  Seegehalli , where  it reaches  its 
termination  point . This  stretch  plays  a 
significant  role in facilitating  smoother  traffic  
flow  and providing  improved  accessibility  for 
commuters  traveling  between  these  areas  and 
adjoining  localities .
The corridor  intersects  with  the NICE  (Nandi  
Infrastructure  Corridor  Enterprises)  Road,  
forming  a critical  point  of connectivity  that 
links  regional  and arterial  traffic  flows . From  
this junction,  the corridor  extends  further  and 
reaches  Kadabagere  Cross,  a prominent  
landmark  that serves  as an important  access  
point  for nearby  residential  and commercial  
areas . Continuing  its route,  the corridor  moves  
towards  its final  destination,  ending  near  
Seegehalli . This  concluding  stretch  is designed  
to streamline  traffic  and improve  accessibility  
for the surrounding  neighborhoods,  enhancing  
the overall  transportation  network  in the 
region .NICE road
463Figure 376. Proposed Double Decke r Corridor from Hosahalli 
to Kadabagere  cross near Seegehalli  along Magadi road 
Yeshwanthapura Railway StationBEL Road CORRIDOR
 16
MOHAN 
KUMAR 
ROAD
Proposed Double -
Decker Corridor in 
collaboration with 
Indian Railways, 
connecting the BEL 
Road intersection 
to the rear side of 
Yeshwanthpur 
Railway Station.
DOUBLE  DECKER  INTEGRATED  WITH  INDIAN  RAILWAYS
Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanMohan Kumar Road - Double Decker
Yeshwanthapura Railway StationBEL RoadProposed Double -Decker Corridor in collaboration with Indian Railways, connecting the BEL Road 
intersection to the rear side of Yeshwanthpur Railway Station - 2.2 Kms
465Figure 377. Proposed Double -Decker Corridor in collaboration with Indian Railways, connecting the BEL Road intersection to the rear side of 
Yeshwanthpur Railway Station
Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanMohan Kumar Road - Double DeckerMohan  Kumar  Road,  connecting  BEL Road  to Yeshwanthpur,  experiences  significant  traffic  congestion  due to a combination  of 
factors :
1.Narrow  Road  Width : In several  stretches,  the road  is narrow,  leading  to bottlenecks,  especially  during  peak  hours .
2.Mixed  Traffic  Flow : The road  accommodates  a mix of heavy  vehicles,  public  buses,  two-wheelers,  and private  cars,  often  causing  
slower  movement  and chaotic  traffic  conditions .
3.Intersection  Congestion : Key intersections  along  this route,  such  as those  near  BEL Road  and Yeshwanthpur,  see heavy  traffic  
due to merging  vehicles  and poor  signal  management .
4.Proximity  to Railway  Crossings : The area near  Yeshwanthpur  Railway  Station  adds  to the congestion,  with  railway  crossings  
frequently  disrupting  traffic  flow .
5.Choke  Points : The road  has several  choke  points  caused  by encroachments,  unauthorized  parking,  and the presence  of 
commercial  establishments,  which  reduce  the effective  carriageway  width .
6.High  Commuter  Volume : This  stretch  serves  as a critical  link between  residential,  industrial,  and commercial  hubs,  resulting  in 
heavy  commuter  traffic  throughout  the day.
Possible  Solutions :
•Widening  the Road : Land  acquisition  and road  expansion  to eliminate  bottlenecks .
•Improved  Traffic  Management : Optimizing  signal  timings  and deploying  traffic  personnel  at key intersections .
•Dedicated  Bus Lanes : Introducing  bus priority  lanes  to encourage  public  transportation .
•Proposed  Elevated  Corridor : As mentioned,  constructing  an elevated  corridor  over  this stretch  could  help  segregate  local  and 
through  traffic,  easing  congestion .
•Proposed  Double  Decker : as Mentioned  constructing  a double  decker  with  Indian  railways  will have  greater  impact  as railway  
connectivity  will improve  as it connects  the Yeshwanthapura  railways  station  from  the rear end. Total  proposed  corridor  is about  
2.2 kms
466
Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanMohan Kumar Road - Double Decker
The Double  Decker  corridor  begins  at the 
ROB  on BEL Road,  proceeds  along  1st Main  
Road,  and connects  seamlessly  to Mohan  
Kumar  Road
Existing railway Line
Proposed Double DeckerBEL roadStart Pont
467Figure 378. Proposed Double -Decker Corridor in collaboration with 
Indian Railways, connecting the BEL Road intersection to the rear side of 
Yeshwanthpur Railway Station
Proposed Double Decker
Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanMohan Kumar Road - Double DeckerEND Pont
The double -decker  corridor  concludes  at the rear side of 
Yeshwanthpur  Railway  Station,  providing  seamless  
connectivity  and dual  functionality . The lower  deck  is 
designed  to facilitate  railway  operations,  ensuring  smooth  
movement  of trains  and optimizing  station  access . The 
upper  deck  serves  vehicular  traffic,  offering  an elevated  
pathway  to bypass  congestion  and improve  overall  traffic  
flow  in the area . This  strategic  design  ensures  efficient  use 
of space  while  addressing  the needs  of both  railways  and 
road  users ."
Mohan Kumar Road
468Figure 379. Proposed Double -Decker Corridor in collaboration with Indian Railways, connecting the BEL Road intersection to the rear side of Yeshwanthpur 
Railway Station
Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanMohan Kumar Road - Double Decker
Figure 380.  Typical Cross Section of Double Decker
Termination Point of the Corridor
469
Silk BoardHebbal
CORRIDOR
 01
Proposed  
North  – South  
Tunnel  
Corridor  from  
Hebbal  to Silk 
Board
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel ProposalGeneral
Bruhat  Bengaluru  Mahanagara  Palike  (BBMP)  intends  to Construct  
an Underground  Vehicular  Tunnel  for the North  – South  Corridor  
starting  from  Hebbal  Esteem  Mall  junction  to Silk Board  KSRP  
Junction .
In pursuance  of the above,  Rodic  Consultants  Pvt Ltd., New  Delhi  
have  been  appointed  as consultants  to carry  out Consultancy  
Services  for Preparation  of DPR  for the work  of Construction  of 
Underground  Vehicular  Tunnel  from  Hebbal  Esteem  Mall  junction  
to Silk Board  KSRP  junction .
Figure 381: Project Location in Bangaluru Administrative BoundaryProject  Background
Bengaluru  is the fifth largest  city in India  with  an estimated  
population  of over  115 Lakhs  (2011 ). The city limit,  which  was 
around  425 Sq Km in 2007  has increased  to over  800 Sq Km in a 
span  of years . Bengaluru’s  population  has grown  dramatically,  
and the city now  ranks  among  the top metropolitan  areas  in the 
country,  both  in terms  of population  and in terms  of economic  
activity . Bengaluru  has undergone  rapid  urbanization  and has 
transformed  into one of the fastest  growing  economic  centers  of 
the world  which  has attracted  millions  of job-seeking  individuals  
from  different  part of countries  and world .
However,  the city road  networks  have  not seen  major  
improvements  either  in terms  of enhancement  of existing  roadway  
capacity  or creation  of new  road  networks  to reduce  traffic  
congestion . The present -day vehicle  population  in the city is 
around  85 Lakh  with  an average  increase  in number  of vehicles  at 
the rate of 10% per annum . Increasing  traffic  volume  and its associated  adverse  impacts  on traffic  
congestion  and noise  pollution  is a key problem  in Bengaluru . And  
without  the intervention  of planned  construction  to decongest  the 
traffic  hot spots  along  with  promotion  of use of metros,  public  
transport  the situation  is likely  to deteriorate  further . Reference  from  
CMP  2020  (by BMRCL  and DULT)  has been  taken  to integrate  our 
traffic  studies  and simulations  for forecasting  the future  demand  
model . Due to the poor  level  of services  (mostly  section  in LOS  F) of 
the present  route  of North  – South  corridor,  the passenger  travelling  
from  North  to South  part & vice versa  for work  trip & travel  trip 
faces  huge  congestion  during  travel . This  leads  to an increase  in VOC  
(vehicle  operation  cost)  & VOT  (Value  of time  cost)  accumulating  
higher  economical  loss. 471
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel ProposalFor decongestion  of the Bengaluru  city, BBMP  has assigned  the 
work  of “Consultancy  services  for preparation  of Comprehensive  
Bengaluru  city road  infrastructure  plan  to decongest  traffic  and to 
prepare  comprehensive  traffic  management  plan  for proposal  of 
vehicular  tunnel  / Grade  separator  /Road  widening  in selected  
corridors  in the State  of Karnataka”  to M/S Altinok  Consulting  
Engineering  Inc. In Jv With  M/S Lion Engineering  Consultants  Pvt. 
Limited . The feasibility  study  has identified  North  South  corridor  as 
the high  traffic  density  corridor  of the Bangaluru  city. The 
decongestion  of North -South  corridor  has been  suggested  in the 
feasibility  study  by providing  underground  tunnel  from  Hebbal  to 
Silk Board . The major  problem  statement  identified  in feasibility  
studies  are as under :
❖ In peak  hour  and even  most  of the day the traffic  runs  at 
average  speed  of 15-20 Kmph  
❖ The Level  of Service  is between  LOS -E and LOS -F i.e., 15 to 20 
Kmph  resulting  in huge  loss of fuel
❖ The city roads  have  exhausted  their  lane capacity  and there  is 
no land  available  to widen  the roads  due to heavy  built -up 
areas  and higher  price  of land .
One of the corridors  that has been  taken  up for this 
assignment  is North  South  Corridor  which  we have  studied . 
The road  sections  connecting  the electronic  city (Southern  
part)  to Hebbal  Junction  (Northern  Part)  is Hebbal  Flyover - 
Mekri  circle -Chalyuka  circle -Lalbagh  Botanical  Garden -
Silk  Board  Jn. The corridor  width  varies  from  4 lane to Six 
lane. From  Hebbal  Junction  the Airport  is connected  through  
NH-4. The North  South  Corridor  is a very  important  
connection  and due to traffic  congestion,  it chokes  during  
peak  hour  resulting  loss of travel  time  and increase  in 
Vehicle  operation  cost.Need  of Tunnel  
Bengaluru’s  population  has grown  dramatically  in the last decade,  
and the city now  ranks  among  the top metropolitan  areas  in the 
country,  both  in terms  of population  and in terms  of economic  
activity . The city has undergone  a rapid  transformation  into one of 
the most  storied  economic  centers  of the world  and attracted  
millions  of job-seeking  migrants . Increasing  traffic  volumes  and its 
associated  adverse  impacts  on congestion  and air quality  is a key 
problem  in Bengaluru  and elsewhere  in India  and this situation  is 
likely  to deteriorate  further . The proposed  North -South  corridor  is 
planned  to reduce  the congestion  levels  on roads  and reduce  the 
travel  time  of people
The present  North  South  corridor  connects  the north  & south  part 
of Bengaluru  and feeds  the traffic  for work  trips,  airport  trip, 
tourism  trip etc. Most  of the residents  of the North  and eastern  
part of the city are travelling  through  this corridor  for work  
purposes  to white  field  & electronic  city area. The high  traffic  
during  peak  hours  congests  the major  junction  point  and the 
corridor  on the preset  route . The existing  route  traversing  from  
Hebbal - Mekri  Circle  to Golf  Course  to Chalukya  Circle  to Lalbagh  
to Silk board  junction . From  that point  the traffic  divided  towards  
Whitefield  & electronic  city. Due to longer  trip length,  people  use 
private  mode  of communication  for travelling  to the offices  and 
others  outdoor  activities . During  the peak  the average  speed  on 
the north  south  corridor  is just 10 to 15 km/h . Apart  from  above  
the K R Circle,  Mother  dairy  circle  also used  to be congested  
during  the peak  hours . The present  Level  of service,  speed  and 
traffic  density  is as under - This  LOS  is as per Feasibility . Do we 
need  to update/verify  it as per our traffic  output  files.
                     
Level of Service
The Present LOS is FSpeed
Present travel speed is 15 
Kmph.
472
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel ProposalThe city is growing  at a fast pace and the per capita  income  is very good  due to which  people  prefer  private  cars over public  transport . 
The present  section  from  Hebbal  to Golf Course,  Golf Course  to Chalukya  Junction,  Chalukya  to Lal Bagh  and Lal Bagh  to Silk Board  Junction  is the 
main  section  running  through  the central  part of Bengaluru  city. The section  traverses  through  most  of the Government  Offices,  Official  Residences  of 
Members  of Assembly,  Vidhan  Soudha  and other  prominent  administrative  blocks  along  with densely  packed  residential  areas . The traffic  from  airport  
to Main  city and through  traffic  also contributes  to the of congestion  of the North  South  Corridor .
The current  road network  capacity  is already  saturated . The capacity  of the current  road network  needs  to be increased  to cater  for the present  and future  
traffic  demand .
Project  Benefits
The main  objective  of the project  is to provide  safe and efficient  service  levels  to growing  traffic  movements  and better  connectivity  between  
Silk board  junction  and Esteem  mall  junction . All road  users  will be benefited  from  the proposed  improvement  on account  of comfort,  
safety  and reduced  vehicle  operating  costs . Community  will accrue  the benefit  from  proposed  development  project  by way  of improvement  
in the physical  infrastructure ; social  infrastructure ; development  of economy ; reduced  pollution,  vehicle  maintenance,  fuel saving ; 
employment  potential  and other  tangible  benefits . Key BenefitsHigh -speed connectivity and access
Decongestion of existing roads between Esteem mall junction and 
silk board junction
Improved safety and reduced risk of accidents
Reduced noise and air pollution
Reduced vehicle operating & maintenance cost, fuel saving
Improved quality of lifeSocial  And  Economic  Profile  
Bengaluru  Urban  District
Bengaluru,  officially  known  as Bengaluru,  is the Capital  of the 
Indian  State  of Karnataka . It has a population  of over  ten 
million,  making  it a megacity  and the Third  populous  City 
and 5th most  populous  urban  agglomeration  in India . 
The Deputy  Commissioner,  being  the head  of the District  
Administration,  is officer  vested  with  powers  under  the 
Central  and State  Laws . The D.C. office  comes  in direct  contact  
with  the people  and people’s  representatives  at various  levels . 
The office  of the Deputy  Commissioner  apart  from  having  
many  original  works  enumerated  under  different  Acts  and 
Rules  has got the supervisory  and coordinating  roles  at the 
district  level . Apart  from  regulatory  functions,  the Deputy  
Commissioner  guides  and coordinates  the developmental  
activities  of the district .Figure 382: Project Key Benefit
473
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel Proposal
Figure 383: Bengaluru Districts MapGeography
Bengaluru  lies in the southeast  of the South  Indian  state  of 
Karnataka . It is in the heart  of the Mysore  Plateau  (a 
region  of the larger  Precambrian  Deccan  Plateau)  at an 
average  elevation  of 920 m (3,020 ft). It is positioned  at 
12.97°N 77.56°E and covers  an area of 1741  km2 (673 mi2). 
Most  of the city of Bengaluru  lies in the Bengaluru  Urban  
district  of Karnataka  and the surrounding  rural  areas  are a 
part of the Bengaluru  Rural  district . The region  
comprising  the Bengaluru  Urban  and Rural  districts  is 
known  as the Bengaluru  (region) . The Government  of 
Karnataka  has carved  out the new  district  of Ramanagara  
from  the old Bengaluru  Rural  district .
Bengaluru  has a handful  of freshwater  lakes  and water  
tanks,  some  of which  are Madivala  tank,  Hebbal  Lake,  
Ulsoor  Lake  and Sankey  Tank . Groundwater  occurs  in 
silty  to sandy  layers  of the alluvial  sediments . The 
Peninsular  Gneissic  Complex  (PGC)  is the most  dominant  
rock  unit in the area and includes  granites,  gneisses  and 
migmatites,  while  the soils  of Bengaluru  consist  of red 
laterite  and red, fine loamy  to clayey  soils .
Topography
Bengaluru  has two unique  Topography  terrains —North  Bengaluru  
taluk  and the South  Bengaluru  taluk . The North  Bengaluru  taluk  is a 
relatively  higher -level  plateau  and lies between  an average  of 839 to 962 
meters  above  sea level . The middle  of the taluk  has a prominent  ridge  
running  NNE -SSW . The highest  point  in the city, Doddabettahalli , 
(962m) is on this ridge . There  are gentle  slopes  and valleys  on either  
side of this ridge . The low-lying  area is marked  by a series  of water  
tanks  varying  in size from  a small  pond  to those  of considerable  extent,  
but all shallow .Seismicity
Because  it lies in the seismically  stable  region,  Zone  III 
(encompassing  parts  of Karnataka,  Maharashtra,  Kerala,  
Tamil  Nadu  and Andhra  Pradesh),  Bengaluru  has been  
untouched  by major  seismic  events . Only  mild  tremors  
have  been  recorded  in the city. The largest  earthquake  that 
has ever  hit the city was of magnitude  6.4 in April  1843 .
474
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel Proposal
Figure 384 : Project Alignment
Project  Location  and Alignment  
The entire  project  is in Bengaluru  city and connecting  the northern  part to the southern  part of the city. 
As per the feasibility  report,  the North  – South  Corridor  starting  from  Hebbal  Esteem  Mall  junction  to Silk Board  KSRP  Junction  is going  
to be developed  as Underground  Vehicular  tunnel  having  03 intermediate  locations  connected  via ramps  for entry  & exit into the Main  
Tunnel . This  alignment  will connect  the Hebbal  and silk Board  Junction  and proposed  3 intermediate  ramps  at Mekri  circle,  Racecourse  & 
Lalbagh  directly . The travel  time  will be reduced  from  about  90 minutes  to 20 minutes . 
The details  of alignment  and its intermediate  ramps  have  been  provided  in given  table .
475
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel Proposal From Hebbal to Silk Board
Length: 16.681 km
Lane Configuration: 3 Lane
Start:  Approach of Hebbal 
Flyover
End: Hosur Road (Silk Board 
Junction)From Silk Board to Hebbal
Length: 16.680 km
Lane Configuration: 3 Lane
Start: Approach of Hebbal 
Flyover
End: Hosur Road (Silk Board 
Junction)Table 109 : Alignment Details of Main Tunnel The start  Point  of Project  
The project  Stretch  Start  from  Hebbal  near  Esteem  Mall  and end near  silk 
board  junction,  where  existing  road  is a 6-lane divided  carriageway  road .
The starting  point  has two entry  ramps  into the tunnel  and two exits . Each  
entry  and exit have  2 lane configurations .
The Entry  at the start  location  has been  planned  near  esteem  mall  for 
connecting  traffic  from  Airport  flyover  and another  entry  has been  provided  
from  service  road  for the traffic  coming  from  Sahakarnagar  & Yelahanka  to 
the main  tunnel  for conflict  free movement  at junction  another  entry  ramps  
have  been  proposed  at the Ring  Road . Similarly,  two exits  have  been  
proposed,  one towards  the Ring  road  and another  on service  road .
Sr. No. Location Description Length Direction Of Traffic Lane Configuration
Ramps at Start of Main Tunnel
1
Hebbal JunctionEntry Ramp 1 into Main Tunnel 0.360 KmsFrom Service Road Airport to 
Bangaluru City2 Lane
2 Exit Ramp 08 from Main Tunnel 0.700 kmsTo Service Road towards Sahakar 
Nagar, Yelahanka2 Lane
3 Entry Ramp 2 into Main Tunnel 0.814 KmsFrom KR Puram on Outer Ring 
Road 2 Lane
4 Exit Ramp 07 from Main Tunnel 0.400 KmsTowards Yeswanthpur on Outer 
Ring Road 2 Lane
Intermediate Ramps
1
Near Palace Ground/ Mekri 
CircleEntry Ramp 03 into Main Tunnel 1.255 Kms From Jayamahal Road 2 Lane
2 Exit Ramp 06 from Main Tunnel 1.910 Kms Towards CV Raman Road 2 Lane
3 Entry Ramp 4 into Main Tunnel 1.320 KmsEntry from CV Raman Road 
towards Hebbal2 Lane
4 Exit Ramp 05 from Main Tunnel 0.963 Kms Exit Towards Jayamahal Road 2 Lane
1
Near Racecourse / Vidhan 
SaudhaEntry Ramp 5 into Main Tunnel 1.387 KmsFrom Palace Road Towards 
Hebbal2 Lane
2 Entry Ramp 6 into Main Tunnel 1.906 KmsFrom Palace Road Towards Silk 
Board Junction2 Lane
3 Exit Ramp 04 from Main Tunnel 1.376 KmsOn Seshadri Road (Towards KR 
Circle)2 Lane
4 Exit Ramp 03 from Main Tunnel 1.864 KmsOn Race Couse Road (Towards 
Chalukya Circle2 Lane
1
Near LalbaghEntry Ramp 7 into Main Tunnel 1.416 KmsFrom Siddapura Road (Near 
Ashoka Pillar).2 Lane
2 Exit Ramp 2 from Main Tunnel 1.073 KmsOn Siddapura Road Near Wilson 
Garden2 Lane
Ramps at End of Main Tunnel
1
Silk BoardExit Ramp 1 from Main Tunnel 0.454 KmsOn Sarjapur Road / HSR layout 
(Ring Road)2 Lane
2 Entry Ramp 8 into Main Tunnel 0.663 KmsFrom Sarjapur Road / HSR layout 
(Ring Road)2 LaneTable  110: Alignment Details of Intermediate ramps
476
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel Proposal
Figure 485 : Entry and Exit at Hebbal 
JunctionSr. No. Location Description LengthDirection Of 
TrafficLane 
Configuration
Main Tunnel
1
HebbalEntry Ramp 1 into Main 
Tunnel0.360 KmsFrom Service 
Road Airport to 
Bangaluru City2 Lane
2Exit Ramp 08 from Main 
Tunnel0.700 kmsTo Service Road 
towards Sahakar 
Nagar, 
Yelahanka2 Lane
3Entry Ramp 2 into Main 
Tunnel0.814 KmsFrom KR Puram 
on Outer Ring 
Road 2 Lane
4Exit Ramp 07 from Main 
Tunnel0.400 KmsTowards 
Yeswanthpur on 
Outer Ring Road 2 LaneTable 111 : Entry Exit Details at Hebbal Junction
477
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel ProposalFirst  Intermediate  Ramps  
The first intermediate  location  has been  planned  near  Mehkri  circle . Only  two ramps  has been  provisioned,  the entry  ramp  from  
Jayamahal  main  road  for traffic  going  to silk board  junction  and exit ramps  on C V Raman  road .
Sr. 
No.Location Description LengthDirection 
of TrafficLane 
Configuration
Intermediate Ramps
1
Near Palace 
Ground/ Mekri 
CircleEntry Ramp 03 into 
Main Tunnel1.255 
KmsFrom Jayamahal 
Road2 Lane
2Exit Ramp 06 from 
Main Tunnel1.910 
KmsTowards CV 
Raman Road2 Lane
3Entry Ramp 4 into 
Main Tunnel1.320 
KmsEntry from CV 
Raman Road 
towards Hebbal2 Lane
4Exit Ramp 05 from 
Main Tunnel0.963 
KmsExit Towards 
Jayamahal Road 2 LaneFigure 386 : Entry and 
Exit Ramps at Palace 
Ground
Table 112 : Ramps Details at Palace 
Ground/ Mekri  Circle
478
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel ProposalSecond  Intermediate  Ramps  
The Second  intermediate  ramps  have  been  planned  near  racecourse/  Vidhan  Soudha  to connect  the central  part of Bengaluru . Entry  and exit ramps  have  been  
provisioned  in both  tunnel  tubes . All the four  ramps  (2 entry  and 2 exit ramps)  have  carriageway  width  of 2 lanes . 
Two  entry  ramps  from  Palace  Road,  one towards  Hebbal  and one towards  the Silk Board  Junction . Two  exit ramps,  One exit on Seshadri  Road  (Towards  KR 
Circle)  and one exit on Race  Course  road  ( Toward  Chalukya  circle  ).
Figure  387 : Entry and Exit Ramps at Race Course and Vidhan  SoudhaSr. 
No.Location Description Length Direction Of TrafficLane 
Configuration
Intermediate Ramps
1
Near Race 
Course / 
Vidhan SaudhaEntry Ramp 5 
into Main Tunnel1.387 
KmsFrom Palace Road 
Towards Hebbal2 Lane
2Entry Ramp 6 
into Main Tunnel1.906 
KmsFrom Palace Road 
Towards Silk Board 
Junction2 Lane
3Exit Ramp 04 
from Main 
Tunnel1.376 
KmsOn Seshadri Road 
(Towards KR Circle)2 Lane
4Exit Ramp 03 
from Main 
Tunnel1.864 
KmsOn Race Couse Road 
(Towards Chalukya  
Circle2 Lane
Third  Intermediate  Ramps  
The 3rd intermediate  location  is planned  near  Lalbagh . Only  two ramps  have  been  provisioned,  the 
entry  ramp  from  Ashoka  Pillar  on Siddapura  road  for traffic  going  to Hebbal  junction  and exit ramps  
on Marigowda  road  towards  Dairy  circle  at Wilson  Garden . 
Figure 388 : Entry and Exit Lalbagh Botanical GardenTable 113 : Ramps Details at Race Course/ Vidhan  Saudha
479
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel Proposal
Sr. 
No.Location Description Length Direction Of TrafficLane 
Configuration
Intermediate Ramps
1
Near 
LalbaghEntry Ramp 7 
into Main Tunnel1.416 
KmsFrom Siddapura  
Road (Near Ashoka 
Pillar).2 Lane
2Exit Ramp 2 from 
Main Tunnel1.073 
KmsOn Siddapura Road 
Near Wilson Garden2 LaneTable 114: Ramps Details • The entry  ramp  from  Ashoka  Pillar  on Siddapura  road  for 
traffic  going  to Hebbal  junction .
• Exit ramps  on Siddapura  road  (marigowda  road  towards  
Dairy  circle) . 
The End point  of Project  
The Tunnel  ends  before  silk board  junction  on Hosur  road . 
Both  entry  and exit ramps  has been  planned  on Hosur  Road  
for the traffic  going  to electronic  city. However,  additional,  
entry  & exit ramp  has been  planned  to connect  the traffic  
going  to Ring  Road/  HSR  layout  area on Sarjapur  road  near  
St. John  Hospital .
Figure 389 : End Point of Project Alignment480
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel ProposalSr. No. Location Description LengthDirection Of 
TrafficLane 
Configurati
on
Main Tunnel
1
Silk 
BoardExit Ramp 1 from 
Main Tunnel0.454 KmsOn Sarjapur 
Road / HSR 
layout (Ring 
Road)2 Lane
2Entry Ramp 8 
into Main Tunnel0.663 KmsFrom 
Sarjapur 
Road / HSR 
layout (Ring 
Road)2 LaneFeasible  Alignment
The alignment  option  has been  discussed  with  stake  holders  
such  as BBMP,  BMRCL,  KRIDE  and BDA . The proposal  has 
been  planned  in such  a way  to minimise  the infringement  
with  the ongoing  surrounding  development  project . The 
alignment  proposed  has been  agreed  by BBMP  and it is the 
best feasible  option  for tunnel  and its ramps . 
Infringement  with  the proposed  alignment :
The proposed  tunnel  alignment  starting  from  Hebbal  and ending  at Silk Board  junction  including  3 intermediate  ramps  in between . The 
proposed  development  plan  in having  infringement  with  ongoing  & planned  work  of Metro  and K-Ride . The detail  is as under - 
Proposed Tunnel 
Alignment Location/ 
CHInfringement withCH of metro/ 
RailType of InfringementProposal in the 
instant Tunnel 
alignmentRemarks
KM 0.450 to 0.750Metro Phase 2B 
(Elevated)CH 11.480 to 
11.600Under construction 
Metro Pier is coming 
along alignmentMetro span to be 
increasedDiscussion required 
with BMRCL
Km 1.425Metro Phase 3 
(elevated)CH 10.500 to 
10.600Under construction 
Metro Pier is coming 
along alignmentMetro span to be 
increasedDiscussion required 
with BMRCL
Km 1.425Metro Phase 2B 
(elevated)CH 10.500 to 
10.600Under construction 
Metro Pier is coming 
along alignmentMetro span to be 
increasedDiscussion required 
with BMRCL
Km 1.600K-Ride (C2 corridor, 
at grade)/ IR10.200 Crossing alignmentProposed Tunnel 
going Underground 
(with min. 1D cover)Discussion required 
with KRIDE/ IRTable 116 : Infringement Points with Proposed TunnelTable 115 : Entry and Exit Details
481
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel ProposalKm 0.300 (Exit 
ramp 4 - CV 
Ramao Rd.)Metro Phase 3A 
(UG)CH 32.050Crossing 
Proposed 
alignmentProposed Tunnel 
going below 
proposed metro 
line (with 1D 
cover)Discussion 
required with 
BMRCL
Km 7.000K-Ride (C3 
corridor, 
elevated)/ IRCH 15.170 to 
15.220Crossing Proposed 
alignmentK-RIDE Span 
need to be re -
checked if 
requiredDiscussion 
required with 
KRIDE/ IR
Km 7.000Metro Phase 3A 
(UG)CH 29.900 to 
29.980Crossing proposed 
alignmentProposed Tunnel 
going below 
proposed metro 
line (with min. 
1D cover)Discussion 
required with 
BMRCL
Km 0.000 to km 
0.750 (Entry 
ramp 1 – Palace 
Rd.)Metro Phase 3A 
(UG)CH 27.900 to 
28.940Parallel to 
proposed 
alignmentProposed Tunnel 
ramps going 
parallel to metro 
line in Open cut 
and Cut & Cover; 
Integration is 
requiredDiscussion 
required with 
BMRCL
Km 8.550Metro Phase 1 
(UG)CH 8.400 to 
8.500Crossing running 
metro lineProposed Tunnel 
going below 
metro line (with 
min. 1D cover)Discussion 
required with 
BMRCL
Km 14.550Metro Phase 2 
(UG)CH 7.870 to 
7.960Crossing under 
construction metro 
lineProposed Tunnel 
going below 
metro line (with 
minimum 1D 
cover)Discussion 
required with 
BMRCL
Km 0.150 to 0.454 
(exit 2 at silk 
board towards 
Sarjapur Rd., 
near St. john 
hospital)Metro Phase 3A 
(UG)CH 20.480 to 
20.490Crossing Proposed 
alignmentProposed Tunnel 
ramps crossing 
proposed metro 
line in Cut & 
Cover; 
Integration is 
requiredDiscussion 
required with 
BMRCL
Km 0.550 to 0.663 
(entry 4 at silk 
board towards 
Hebbal from 
Sarjapur Rd. 
near john 
hospital)Metro Phase 3A 
(UG)CH 20.040Crossing Proposed 
alignmentProposed Tunnel 
ramps crossing 
proposed metro 
line at grade; 
Integration is 
requiredDiscussion 
required with 
BMRCLEngineering  Surveys  and Investigations
 Based  upon  the objectives  of the project . With  careful  
planning  and efficient  use of resources  different  tasks  have  
been  done  simultaneously . Based  on the objectives  and scope  
of the consultancy  services,  an appropriate  methodology  has 
been  developed  by the consultants  to address  the other  
requirements  also,  especially  regarding  various  intermediate  
targets  and completion  period,  manning  schedule,  and TOR .
 A work  plan  has been  prepared  based  on the methodology  
developed . A competent  team  of suitably  qualified  key 
professionals  as per the requirements  and other  supporting  
staff  has been  selected  to carry  out the services  fieldwork  and 
office  work .
Existing  Features  of Project
The project  starts  near  Esteem  Mall  Hebbal  Junction  and Ends  
at Silk board  Junction . The alignment  passes  through  nodal  
points/  stretch  of the Bengaluru  city.
First  stretch  is Hebbal  to Golf  course  whose  existing  roadway  
width  is 6 lane divided  carriageway,  then  further  there  is 
connectivity  to Chalukya  circle  via 4 lane existing  divided  
carriageway  road . After  that Calukya  circle  is connected  to 
Lalbagh  and finally  Lalbagh  to Silkboard  junction  all the 
stretches  are 4 lane divided  carriageway .
The location  of entry  and exit ramps  have  been  analyzed .
• At the Start  End,  the road  is 6 lanes  with  divided  
carriageway . There  is presence  of Minor  bridges  near  
Esteem  mall  which  channelizes  the stream  if Hebbal  lake. 
The construction  of metro  (name  of metro  line and its 
links)  is underway,  which  affects  our project  start  point . 
• At the End Point  the road  is 4 lanes  with  divided  
carriageway . The road  have  a under  construction  double  
decker  flyover  at Silk Board  junction  and metro  is also 
under  construction  at the project  end location .
The alignment  passes  through  some  of the prominent  
stretches  of the Bengaluru  city which  caters  the heavy  
traffic  throughout  the day.
482
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel ProposalReconnaissance  Survey
A preliminary  survey  has been  conducted  to gather  general  
information  about  the project  area. The purpose  of the 
reconnaissance  survey  is to get a broad  understanding  of the 
terrain,  conditions,  Environmental  and Social  Considerations,  
Safety  and Risk  Assessment  of the project  area .
Road  Inventory
Road  inventory  was carried  out in the first week  of August  2024  
over  the possible  locations  of the project  alignment . The road  
conditions  are found  to be good,  some  of the roads  have  undergone  
strengthening  of bitumen  surface  through  the provision  of White  
Topping . Metro  is being  constructed  at the starting  point  of our 
project  alignment . However,  the project  influence  area the volume  
of traffic  is quite  high . 
Existing  Carriageway
The existing  road  infrastructure  includes  lane configurations  of 4 
lanes,  and 6 lanes  in various  segments . Furthermore,  it is observed  
that several  metro  routes  intersect  with  these  corridors . The road  
stretches  and lane details  are as follows :
Stretch Lane Configuration
1. Hebbal  to Golf  course 6 lanes
2. Golf  course  to Chalukya 4 lanes
3. Chalukya  to Lalbagh  
botanical  garden4 lanes
4. Lalbagh  botanical  garden  to 
silk board4 lanesTable 117 : Existing CarriagewayAlignment  and Geometry
An current  average  travel  speed  is 15-20 km/hr  in the project  
stretch  because  of traffic  congestion . 
Terrain  and Land  Use
Project  area lies in plain  terrain  in entire  length . The land -use 
pattern  for the project  area  is densely  populated  builtup  of 
Bengaluru  City . 
Traffic  Survey  at Site 
For the evaluation  of the traffic  demand  estimation  on the 
proposed  North  – South  corridor  in Bengaluru  and impact  on the 
road  network  in study  area,  traffic  model  has been  developed  in 
PTV  Visum  2024 . Macro  simulation  analysis  has been  conducted  
to understand  the overall  travel  patterns  in the study  area. PTV  
Visum  2024  helps  to understand  the existing  traffic  and travel  
patterns  and bottlenecks  in the transportation  system . Further  it 
is used  for scenario  testing  according  to the changes  in demand  
and infrastructure . Comprehensive  data  collection  has been  done  
to understand  the existing  traffic  and travel  pattern  and for 
development  of the base  year  model . Further  updating  the 
demand  and network  in the model  the diversion  to the corridor  
have  been  estimated .
The traffic  survey  has been  planned  along  the proposed  corridor,  
The location  of traffic  survey  mainly  for classified  Volume  count,  
O-D Survey  and Turning  movement  survey  has been  studied  
and detailed  analysis  has been  described  in Chapter  6 of this 
report . 
483
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel Proposal
Figure 390 : Traffic Surveys conducted at Project Location
Topography  Survey : 
The topography  survey  has been  carried  out using  Drone  LiDAR  for the location  which  is in green  zone  however  the yellow  and red zone  is 
still pending . The Topography  survey  using  DGPS  (Differential  Global  Positioning  System)  has been  conducted  for all the entry,  exit and 
intermediate  ramps  locations .
Figure 391 : Topography Survey on Site484
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel ProposalGeotechnical  & Geophysical  Investigation : 
Secondary  data  from  ongoing  metro  projects  (Nearby  Proposed  tunnel  alignment)  has been  considered  for geological  study . However,  
a confirmatory  bore  holes  and geophysical  survey  (MASW -Multichannel  Analysis  of Surface  Wave  and SRT-Seismic  Refraction  Test),  is 
being  conducted  to verify  the reports  collected  for the design .
The details  of the Secondary  data  is provided  in GIR Volume  submitted  separately .
Figure 392 : Geophysical Survey on Site
Traffic  Surveys  Analysis
Classified  Vehicle  Count,  Origin  and Destination  and Turning  Movement  Count  has been  conducted  at numerous  locations . The locations  
have  been  selected  to get the real traffic  trends  that directly  and indirectly  affect  our project . The traffic  surveys  have  been  extended  to a 
larger  area outside  of our project .
At the following  locations  Traffic  Locations  have  been  conducted  and their  detailed  Analysis  is presented  in chapter  6 of Main  report .
Sr. No. Turning Movement Count Locations
1 CN Rao underpass Junction
2 Banglore Cantt Junction
3 Basaveshwara circle
4 KR Circle
5 Cubbon  Park UB City signal
6 Shoolay Circle
7 Lalbagh ChowkTable 118: Traffic Survey Locations (Turning Moment Count)
Speed  and Delay  analysis  has also been  done  for the project  location . Traffic  
flow  diagrams  and traffic  demand  analysis  have  been  done  via PTV  Vissum  
software  and their  findings  are discussed  in detail  later  in this report .
485
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel ProposalSr. No. Location CVC OD
1NH-44 Bellary Road (Near -Sakar Nagar)Done Done
2NH-75 Malur -Byranahalli Rd Outer Ring 
Road (Near -Nagavara park)Done Done
3NH-75 Malur -Byranahalli Rd Outer Ring 
Road (Near -Devinagar BEL Circle)Done Done
4AH-47 Malur Road (Near -Science Gallery)Done Done
5Guttahalli Main Road (Near -Uniworth 
Plaza)Done Done
6NR road (Near -Silver Jubilee Park)Done Done
7Siddapura Road (Near -Maharaja Agrasena 
Bhavana)Done Done
8Marigowda Road (Near -National Institute 
of Mental Health & Neuro Sciences)Done Done
9NH-44 Bengaluru -Chennai Highway 
(Near -Madiwala  footbridge)Done DoneTable 119: Traffic Survey Locations (CVC and OD)
The Turning Movement Count survey has been conducted at the following 
junctions in the project influence area.
Current  level  of Service  in the project  Influence  Area
The Level  of service  is defined  as per the IRC: IRC:106-1990 -
Guidelines  for Capacity  of Urban  Roads  in Plain  Areas .
LOS Description
ARepresents a condition of free flow with average travel speeds usually about 
90 per cent of the free -flow speed.
BRepresents a zone of stable flow, with the drivers still having reasonable 
freedom to select their desired speed and maneuver within the traffic stream
CThis also is a zone of stable flow but marks the beginning of the range of flow 
in which the operation of individual users becomes significantly affected by 
interactions with others in the traffic stream.
DRepresents the limit of stable flow, with conditions approaching close to 
unstable flow. Due to high density, the drivers are severely restricted in their 
freedom to select desired speed and maneuver within the traffic stream.
ERepresents operating conditions when traffic volumes are at or close to the 
capacity level. The speeds are reduced to a low, but relatively uniform value, 
average value being one -third the free flow speed.
F Represents zone of forced or breakdown flowAs per the findings  of traffic  volume  count  the current  Level  of 
Service  on the below  mentioned  stretches  in the project  influence  
area  is mentioned  below .
S. No. Location Name Directions Level of Service 
(Base Year)
1 NH-44 Bellary Road 
(Near -Sakar Nagar)Dir-I: Yelahanka to Hebbal LOS F
Dir I - Service Lane LOS F
Dir-II: Hebbal to 
YelahankaLOS F
Dir II - Service Lane LOS B
2 NH-75 Malur -Byranahalli 
Rd Outer Ring Road 
(Near -Nagavara park)Dir-I: Bellary Road To 
NagavaraLOS D
Dir I - Service Lane LOS E
Dir-II :Nagavara To Bellary 
RoadLOS D
Dir II - Service Lane LOS C
3 NH-75 Malur  -Byranahalli  
Rd Outer Ring Road 
(Near -Devinagar  BEL 
Circle)Dir-I : Hebbal To 
YashwantpurLOS E
Dir-II : Yashwantpur To 
HebbalLOS C
4 AH-47 Malur Road (Near -
Science Gallery)Dir-I : Mekhri circle To 
AirportLOS F
Dir I - Service Lane LOS E
Dir-II : Airport To Mekhri 
circleLOS F
Dir II - Service Lane LOS C
5 Guttahalli Main Road 
(Near -Uniworth Plaza)Dir-I : Mahalakshmi Gudi 
Circle To Bengaluru Golf 
ClubLOS F
Dir-II : Bengaluru Golf 
Club To Mahalakshmi 
Gudi CircleLOS F
6 NR road (Near -Silver 
Jubilee Park)Dir-I : Kempegowda 
Tower To ChamrajpetLOS F
Dir-II : Chamrajpet To 
Kempegowda TowerLOS F
7 Siddapura Road (Near -
Maharaja Agrasena 
Bhavana)Dir-I : Ashoka Piller To 
Mallinge HospitalLOS F
Dir-II : Mallinge Hospital 
To Ashoka PillerLOS C
8 Marigowda  Road (Near -
National Institute Of 
Mental Health & Neuro 
Sciences)Dir-I : Dairy Circle To 
Wilson GardenLOS F
Dir-II :Wilson Garden To 
Dairy CircleLOS FTable 120 : LOS on the traffic cordon points on existing road
486
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel ProposalTraffic  Volume  Counts  at Cordon  Points
Nine  cordon  points  were  identified  for an understanding  
of the traffic  characteristics  in the study  area. The 
analysis  of the classified  volume  count  survey  at the 
cordons  is given  in the sub-sections  below . The total  
inbound  and outbound  traffic  flow  at each  of the 
cordons  is presented  in Table  142 and daily  traffic  on 
each  cordon  point  is shown  in Figure  direction  wise .Location Direction Vehicles PCUs Total 
VehiclesTotal 
PCUs
1 NH-44 Bellary Road 
(Near -Sakar Nagar)Dir-I: Yelahanka To 
Hebbal178815 175553
393137 385968Dir-II: Hebbal To 
Yelahanka214322 210415
2 NH-75 Malur  -
Byranahalli  Rd Outer 
Ring Road (Near -
Nagavara park)Dir-I: Bellary Road To 
Nagavara117553 113677
222323 212544Dir-II: Nagavara To 
Bellary Road104770 98867
3 NH-75 Malur -
Byranahalli Rd Outer 
Ring Road (Near -
Devinagar BEL Circle)Dir-I: Hebbal To 
Yashwantpur74262 68921
139793 130729Dir-II: Yashwantpur 
To Hebbal65531 61809
4 AH-47 Malur Road 
(Near -Science Gallery)Dir-I: Malegaon To 
Nashik City139418 131287
277295 263180Dir-II: Nashik City To 
Malegaon137877 131893
5 Guttahalli Main Road 
(Near -Uniworth Plaza)Dir-I: Malegaon To 
Nashik City111699 105740
267771 256433Dir-II: Nashik City To 
Malegaon156072 150694
6 NR road (Near -Silver 
Jubilee Park)Dir-I: Malegaon To 
Nashik City121760 112552
252461 232259Dir-II: Nashik City To 
Malegaon130701 119708
7 Siddapura Road (Near -
Maharaja Agrasena 
Bhavana)Dir-I: Ashoka Piller To 
Mallinge Hospital43860 38960
83509 73569 Dir-II: Mallinge 
Hospital To Ashoka 
Piller39649 34610
8 Marigowda Road 
(Near -National Institute 
Of Mental Health & 
Neuro Sciences)Dir-I: Dairy Circle To 
Wilson Garden54855 54282
108421 107685 Dir-II: Wilson Garden 
To Dairy Circle 53566 53402
9 NH-44 Bengaluru -
Chennai Highway 
(Near -Madiwala  
footbridge)Dir-I: Adugodi  To 
Electronic City
120551 103963 265528 227195Table 121 : Traffic Volume Counts at Cordon Locations
Figure 393 : Map Showing Locations of Traffic 
Volume Count Surveys.
487
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel ProposalTraffic  Modelling  on our project  alignment
The North -South  Corridor  is proposed  in Bengaluru  to 
decongest  the vehicular  traffic  congestion  within  the city. The 
diversion  estimation  for the proposed  North -South  Corridor  is 
done  considering  the Modal  Share  prescribed  in the 
Comprehensive  Mobility  Plan  2020  to understand  the amount  
of traffic  that will be diverted  in the proposed  facility .
The diversion  estimation  is done  on state -of-the-art software  
PTV  Visum  2024  to model  real-life scenario  for realistic  traffic  
evaluation  through  the input  of primary  data  as well  as 
secondary  data .
Table  143 below  shows  the total  mode -wise  estimated  trips  for 
horizon  year  2031  and 2041  for all the three  scenarios  where  
Scenario  1 consist  of largest  share  of cars and Scenario  3 consist  
of largest  share  of public  transport  due to which  Scenario  1 has 
the highest  number  of car trips  and Scenario  3 has the lowest  
number  of car trips . Both  scenario  1 and 3 are referred  from  
CMP  2020 . Scenario  2 is considered  as the intermediate  scenario  
having  a reasonable  modal  share .
Year 2031 Year 2041
Mode S1 S2 S3 S1 S2 S3
Auto  
Ricksh aw25111 23812 19859 29631 28098 23434
Two -
Wheeler  153528 128708 100381 181163 151876 118449
Car 83005 72507 61168 97946 86211 72178Table 122: Estimated Total trips during morning peak 
hour.
Further,  all these  three  scenarios  are evaluated  considering  toll 
and without  toll conditions . In without  toll condition,  the Level  
of Service  is compromised  in year  2031  only  for section  2 and 3 
therefore  it was not a viable  option  to be considered .For with  toll scenario,  the average  toll price  considered  for Car is Rs 
16/km . Considering  this, for horizon  year  2031  and 2041  all the 
three  scenarios  were  evaluated  to understand  the impact  of the 
application  of toll in the proposed  North -South  Corridor . However,  
the scenario  2 is considered  as the reasonable  scenario  and it is 
considered  for further  evaluations . 
The proposed  corridor  was divided  into four  sections  based  on the 
ramp  locations . Table  123 shows  section  wise  morning  peak  hour  
volume  on the proposed  corridor . It can be observed  that all the 
sections  of the corridor  are having  Level  of Service  B and C in 
horizon  year  2031  and 2041 . However,  section  2 and 3 towards  the 
Silk board  Junction  has high  volume  in horizon  year  2031 .
SectionYear 2031 (With Toll) Year 2041 (With Toll)
PCU/
HrLOS PCU/Hr LOS
Section 
1Towards Airport 902 LOS B 1276 LOS B
Towards Bengaluru 
City2645 LOS C 3770 LOS C
Section 
2Towards Airport 1834 LOS B 2333 LOS C
Towards Bengaluru 
City4030 LOS D 5161 LOS F
Section 
3Towards Airport 2653 LOS C 3742 LOS C
Towards Bengaluru 
City4705 LOS E 5559 LOS F
Section 
4Towards Airport 2005 LOS B 2951 LOS C
Towards Bengaluru 
City1551 LOS B 1811 LOS BTable 123: Assignment Results - Scenario 2 (Morning Peak Hour PCU) for 2031 and 
2041 (with toll)
Considering  the results  obtained,  a diversion  of approximately  15% is 
estimated  on the proposed  North -South  Corridor . 
The detailed  process  of data  collection,  CMP -2020  incorporation  in our 
project,  Traffic  analysis  and traffic  modelling  through  PTV  Visum  has 
been  mentioned  in detail  in Traffic  Chapter  of Main  Report .488
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel ProposalImprovement  Proposals  
These  improvement  proposals  are based  on the findings  of various  
engineering  features  carried  out on the project  roads  such  as Traffic  
Survey  and Analysis,  Inventory  Data  and Geotechnical  & 
Geophysical  Investigations .
The improvement  proposals  for proposed  widening  include  the 
provisions  for the following  major  items :
a) Main  Tunnel  (Twin  tube  uni-directional  TBM  tunnel,  Cut & 
Cover,  Open  Cut)
b) Entry/  Exit ramps  (NATM  tunnel,  Cut & Cover,  Open  Cut)
c) Tunnel  Passage
d) Vertical  Shaft
e) Traffic  Control  and Safety  Measures  
Design  Standards  
Geometric  Design
  Geometric  design  of a highway  is the process  whereby  the layout  
of the road  in specific  terrain  is designed  to meet  the needs  of the 
road  users  keeping  in view  the road  function,  type  and volume  of 
traffic,  potential  traffic  hazards  and safety  as well  as convenience  of 
the road  users . The principal  areas  of control  for fulfilment  of this 
objective  are- the horizontal  alignment,  vertical  alignment  and the 
road  cross -section . 
  The Consultants  have  referred  to the latest  IRC publications  and 
MORT&H  circulars  regarding  design  standards  for National  
Highways  in India . After  careful  review  of all available  data  and 
requirements  of the project  road  the proposed  Design  Standards  
for adoption  on the project  road  have  been  recommended .Design  Speed
  The project  road  passes  through  plain  terrain . For geometric  design  
of the highway,  design  speed  is used  as an index  which  links  road  
function,  traffic  flow  and terrain . An appropriate  design  speed  
should  correspond  to general  topography  and adjacent  land  use. 
The speed  selected  for design  should  also cater  to travel  needs  and 
behaviour  of the road  users . 
  The design  speed  corresponding  to the type  of terrain  as Per IRC 86-
2018  is as under :
Class of Urban RoadDesign Speed (km/h)
Ruling Minimum
Arterial Road 60 50Table 124 : Design Speed Standards
Levels  of Service  (LOS)
  The Level  of Service  (LOS)  characterizes  the operating  conditions  on 
the roadway  in terms  of traffic  performance  measures  related  to 
speed  and travel  time,  freedom  to manoeuvre,  traffic  interruptions,  
and comfort  and convenience . The levels  of service  range  from  level -
of-service  A (least  congested)  to level -of-service  F (most  congested) . 
The Highways  Capacity  Manual  (HCM)  provides  the following  levels  
of service  definitions :
Level of Service (LOS) General Operating Conditions
A Free flow
B Reasonably free flow
C Stable flow
D Approaching unstable flow
E Unstable flow
F Forced or breakdown flowTable 125 : Standards for Level of Service
Considering the importance of the highway, whereas Level of Service 
(LOS) ‘B’ is desirable and level of service up to LOS - ‘C’ may be 
acceptable.489
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel ProposalMain  Tunnel
A twin  tube  uni-directional  tunnel  has been  proposed  for connecting  the 
northern  part to the southern  part of Bengaluru  City . The project  
alignment  starts  from  Hebbal  Esteem  Mall  junction  and terminates  at 
Silk Board  KSRP  Junction .
Key Features : -
Total  Length 16.690 Km
Length  of Tunnel  (TBM) 14.550 Km
Lane  Configuration 3 Lanes
Diameter Outer  – 14.600m, Inner  – 13.500m
Carriageway  width 10.500m
Walkway 0.700m
Crash  Barrier 0.500m
Cut & Cover  Section At Hebbal  – 950m, At Silk Board  – 
600m
Open  Cut Section At Hebbal  – 430m, At Silk Board  -
160mTable 126: Tube 1 – Hebbal to Silk BoardTotal  Length 16.678 Km
Length  of Tunnel  (TBM) 14.530 Km
Lane  Configuration 3 Lanes
Diameter Outer  – 14.600m, Inner  – 
13.500m
Carriageway  width 10.500m
Walkway 0.700m
Crash  Barrier 0.500m
Cut & Cover  Section At Hebbal  – 970m, At Silk 
Board  -640m
Open  Cut Section At Hebbal  – 430m, At Silk 
Board  -108mTable 127 : Tube 2 – Hebbal to Silk Board
For Bored  Tunnels  
Lining  Type  and Geometry
The finished  inner  diameter  for the Underground  Vehicular  Tunnel  is 
considered  as 13.500m with  a thickness  of 550mm. Universal  
configuration  of the segment  is considered  with  9+1 arrangement . The 
typical  bored  tunnel  cross -section  is shown  in TCS-1 given  later  in the 
chapter  along  with  their  TCS Schedule .Design  Considerations
The segments  shall  be designed  to ensure  that the full design  
life of 100 years  is achieved . The design  method  for the analysis  
of the bored  tunnel  linings  shall  be done  considering  the 
interaction  between  the lining  and the ground,  the deflection  of 
the lining  and the redistribution  of the loading  dependent  upon  
the relative  flexibility  of the lining,  the variability  and the 
compressibility  of the ground,  with  this, the design  shall  take 
into account  all additional  loads,  stresses  and strains  imposed  
by or on to adjacent  Existing  Building  Structure  (EBS) . 
The Loads  acting  on the lining  include  earth  pressure,  water  pressure,  
dead  load,  reactions,  surcharge  & seismic  forces . The lining  shall  also be 
checked  to resist  the various  loads  arising  due to handling,  stacking,  
temporary  grout  load  pressure,  TBM  thrust,  Load  on Bolts  & erector,  
gasket  forces  etc.,
The pre-cast concrete  linings  are designed  in accordance  with  IS 456 
However  other  International  Codes  may  be used  in addition  to the Indian  
Standard  as and when  required .
The Analysis  methods,  Material  and design  calculation  is mentioned  in 
Design  Report  which  is submitted  as Volume  II-B490
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel ProposalFor NATM  Tunnel  
As per the General  arrangement  Drawings  prepared  , there  are two 
types  of NATM  sections  available . i.e., Regular  Cross  Section  and 
Regular  Cross  Section  (VCP)  which  are use for the project . The NATM  
Tunnel  is presented  as TCS-5 and their  Schedules  which  are 
mentioned  later  in chapter .
Design  Considerations
The Tunnel  tube  is proposed  to be constructed  according  to New  
Austrian  Tunnelling  Method  (NATM)  excavation  in different  
weathering  grade  of rock  mass . Ground  excavations  require  the use of 
structural  supports,  to establish  equilibrium  and to limit  the 
displacements  around  the excavation  and at surface . The tunnel  will 
be supported  with  primary  support  for temporary  condition  and a 
cast in-situ concrete  as a permanent  support . Primary  support  design  
has been  done  by considering  site ground  condition . The design  has 
been  performed  for the combination  of different  load  cases  analyzed  
in STAAD . The Analysis  methods,  Material  and design  calculation  is 
mentioned  in Design  Report  which  is submitted  as Volume  II-B
Cut and Cover  Section  
The Cross  Sections  of C&C  Structures  (C&C  section  of 2 lane and 3 
lane)  will be used  as described  Typical  Cross  Sections  as TCS-6 ( 3 lane 
Section)  and TCS-03 ( 2 Lane  section)  which  are presented  later  in 
chapter . C&C  Structures  will have  side walls,  Bottom  Slab  and top 
slab with  Reinforced  Concrete  Structure  in which  Bottom  Slab  of 1.0 m 
thick  (2-lane)  & 1.2m thick  (3-lane)  will casted  over  0.2 m thick  PCC  
and Side  wall  of 1.0 m thick  (2-lane)  & 1.2m thick  (3-lane)  and top slab 
with  1.0 m thick  (2-lane)  & 1.2m thick  (3-lane) .
The Analysis  methods,  Material  and design  calculation  are mentioned  
in Design  Report  which  is submitted  as Volume  II-BOpen  Cut Section
The following  Cross  Sections  of RAMP  Structures  (Ramp  section  of 
2 lane and 3 lane)  will be used  as described  in TCS-02 (3 Lane)  and 
TCS-04 (2 Lane) . RAMP  Structures  will have  side walls  and Bottom  
Slab with  Reinforced  Concrete  Structure  in which  Bottom  Slab of 1 
m thick  and Side  wall  of 1m with  roofing  C/W  pipe  truss  and 
approved  grade  polycarbonate  roofing  sheets .
The Analysis  methods,  Material  and design  calculation  are 
mentioned  in Design  Report  which  is submitted  as Volume  II-B.
Proposed  Typical  Cross  Section  
Typical  cross  section  of the proposed  section  Main  tunnel,  Entry  & 
Exit Ramps  are as under :
Tube 1 : Hebbal to Silk Board (Left)
SL NoChainage
Length TCS Type TCS DETAILSLane
sFrom To
1 0+000 0+430 430 open cut TCS 23 
Lane
2 0+430 1+380 950 cut and cover TCS 63 
Lane
3 1+380 15+930 14550 main TBM tunnel TCS 13 
Lane
4 15+930 16+530 600 cut and cover TCS 63 
Lane
5 16+530 16+690 160 open cut TCS 23 
Lane
Total Length 16690Table 128 : Proposed Typical Cross Section for Main Tunnel Tube 1 and Tube 2
491
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel ProposalTube 2 : Hebbal to Silk Board (Right)
SL NoChainage
Length TCS Type TCS DETAILS Lanes
From To
1 0+000 0+430 430 open cut TCS 2 3 Lane
2 0+430 1+400 970 cut and cover TCS 6 3 Lane
3 1+400 15+930 14530 main TBM tunnel TCS 1 3 Lane
4 15+930 16+570 640 cut and cover TCS 6 3 Lane
5 16+570 16+678 108 open cut TCS 2 3 Lane
Total Length 16678
Hebbal
Entry Ramp 1 (Hebbal Service Road)
SL NoChainageLength TCS Type TCS DETAILS LanesFrom To
1 0+000 0+170 170 TCS 4 Open Cut 2 Lane
2 0+170 0+360 190 TCS 3 Cut & Cover 2 Lane
Total Length 360
Entry Ramp 2 (From ORR To Main Tunnel (km 1.300) Towards Silk Board/ Sarjapur road)
SL NoChainageLength TCS Type TCS DETAILS LanesFrom To
1 0+000 0+600 600 Cut & Cover TCS 3 2 Lane
2 0+600 814 214 Open Cut TCS 4 2 Lane
Total Length 814
Exit Ramp 8 (Hebbal Service Road)
SL NoChainageLength TCS Type TCS DETAILS LanesFrom To
1 0+000 0+450 450 TCS 4 Open Cut 2 Lane
2 0+450 0+700 250 TCS 3 Cut & Cover 2 Lane
Total Length 700
Exit Ramp 7 (From Main Tunnel (km 1.300) To ORR Towards ORR (Outer Ring Road))
SL NoChainageLength TCS Type TCS DETAILS LanesFrom To
1 0+000 0+300 300 Cut & Cover TCS 3 2 Lane
2 0+300 400 100 Open Cut TCS 4 2 Lane
Total Length 400Table 129 : Entry/ Exit ramps at Hebbal Junction
492
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel Proposal
Palace Ground
Entry Ramp 03 (From Jaya Mahal Road)
SL NoChainageLength TCS Type TCS DETAILS LanesFrom To
1 0+000 0+170 170 Open Cut TCS 2 3 Lane
2 0+170 0+360 190 Cut & Cover TCS 6 3 Lane
3 0+360 1+255 895 NATM Tunnel TCS 5 2 Lane
Total Length 1255
Entry Ramp 4 (From CV Raman Road To Main Tunnel (km 4.700) Towards Hebbal)
SL NoChainageLength TCS Type TCS DETAILS LanesFrom To
1 0+000 1+320 1320 NATM Tunnel TCS 5 2 Lane
Total Length 1320
Exit Ramp 06 (Towards C V Raman Road)
SL NoChainageLength TCS Type TCS DETAILS LanesFrom To
1 1+320 0+000 1320 NATM Tunnel TCS 5 2 Lane
2 1+320 1+610 290 Cut & Cover TCS 6 3 Lane
3 1+610 1+910 300 Open Cut TCS 2 3 Lane
Total Length 1910
Exit Ramp 5 (From Main Tunnel (km 4.450) To Jaymahal Road Towards Jaymahal Road)
SL NoChainageLength TCS Type TCS DETAILS LanesFrom To
1 0+360 1+323 963 NATM Tunnel TCS 5 2 Lane
Total Length 963Table 130 : Entry/ Exit 
ramps at Palace GroundFigure 394 : Entry 
and Exit Ramps at 
Hebbal Junction 
493
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel Proposal
Race Course
Entry Ramp 5 (From Palace Road towards Hebbal)
SL NoChainageLength TCS Type TCS DETAILS LanesFrom To
1 0+960 1+550 590 Cut & Cover TCS 3 2 Lane
2 1+550 2347 797 NATM Tunnel TCS 5 2 Lane
Total Length 1387
Entry Ramp 6 (From Palace Road towards Silk Board)
SL NoChainageLength TCS Type TCS DETAILS LanesFrom To
1 0+000 0+230 230 Open Cut TCS 2 2 lane
2 0+230 0+960 730 Cut & Cover TCS 6 3 Lane
3 0+960 1+100 140 Cut & Cover TCS 3 2 Lane
4 1+100 1+906 806 NATM Tunnel TCS 5 2 Lane
Total Length 1906
Exit Ramp 4 (On Seshadri Road towards K R Circle from Hebbal)
SL NoChainageLength TCS Type TCS DETAILS LanesFrom To
1 0+000 0+830 830 NATM Tunnel TCS 5 2 Lane
2 0+830 1+060 230 Cut & Cover TCS 3 2 Lane
3 1+060 1+376 316 Open Cut TCS 4 2 Lane
Total Length 1376
Exit Ramp 3 (On Race Course Road towards Chalukya  Circle from Silk Board)
SL NoChainageLength TCS Type TCS DETAILS LanesFrom To
1 0+000 0+880 880 NATM Tunnel TCS 5 2 Lane
2 0+880 1+530 650 Cut & Cover TCS 3 2 Lane
3 1+530 1+864 334 Open Cut TCS 4 2 Lane
Total Length 1864Figure 395 : Entry and Exit Ramps 
at Palace Ground
Table 131 : Entry/ Exit ramps at 
Race Course:
494
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel Proposal
Lal Bagh
Entry Ramp 7 (From Siddapura Road near Ashok Pillar)
SL NoChainageLength TCS TypeTCS 
DETAILSLanesFrom To
1 0+000 0+150 150 Open Cut TCS 42 Lane
2 0+150 0+470 320Cut & 
CoverTCS 3
2 Lane
3 0+470 1+416 946NATM 
TunnelTCS 5
2 Lane
Total Length 1416
Exit Ramp 2 (Towards Siddapura Road near Wilson Garden)
SL NoChainageLength TCS TypeTCS 
DETAILSLanesFrom To
1 0+000 0+870 870NATM 
TunnelTCS 5
2 Lane
2 0+870 0+930 60Cut & 
CoverTCS 3
2 Lane
3 0+930 1+073 143 Open Cut TCS 42 Lane
Total Length 1073 Figure 396 : Entry and Exit Ramps at RacecourseTable  132: Entry/ Exit ramps at Lal BaghFigure 397 : Entry and Exit ramp at Lalbagh
495
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel ProposalTable 133 : Entry/ Exit ramps at Silk Board
Silk board
Entry Ramp 8 (From Sarjapur Road)
SL NoChainageLength TCS Type TCS DETAILS Lanes
From To
1 0+000 0+400 400 TCS 3 Cut & Cover2 
Lane
2 0+400 0+663 263 TCS 4 Open Cut2 
Lane
Total Length 663
Exit Ramp 1 (Towards Sarjapur Road)
SL NoChainageLength TCS Type TCS DETAILS Lanes
From To
1 0+000 0+240 240 TCS 3 Cut & Cover2 
Lane
2 0+240 0+454 214 TCS 4 Open Cut2 
Lane
Total Length 454
 Figure 398: Entry and Exit ramp at Silk board
Figure 399 : TCS -1, TBM Tunnel Cross -Section
Figure 400.: TCS -2, 3 lane Open Cut Section496
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel Proposal
Figure 401 : TCS -3, 2 lane Cut & Cover Section
Figure 403 : TCS -4, 2 lane Open Cut Section
Figure 402 : TCS -5, 2 lane NATM Tunnel Section
Figure 404 : TCS -6, 3 lane Cut & Cover Section497
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel Proposal
Figure 405 : Typical Cross Section for merger section of Entry/ Exit Ramps & Main 
Tunnel
Figure 406 : TCS for Tunnel Cross Passage
498
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel Proposal
S.No DescriptionLength
(km)RateTotal
Amount
in Rs.Total Amount 
(Rs. in Crores)
BILL NO. 
1Site Clearance 78,89,328.33 0.79 
BILL NO. 
2Earth Works 63,05,013.00 0.63 
Sub Total (Bill -1+Bill -2) 1,41,94,341.33 1.42 
BILL NO. 
3Tunnel Work
A Main Tunnel
a.Tunnelling By TBM (Twin Tunnel) 14.54 415.70 60,44,26,70,696.60 6,044.27 
b.Cross Passages (27 No's) 28,88,85,247.22 28.89 
c.Cut And Cover Tunnel 4.08 238.96 9,74,95,68,000.00 974.96 
d.Open Cut (Ramps) 1.53 77.03 1,17,70,18,400.00 117.70 
e.Shafts (5 No's) 2,65,53,79,134.97 265.54 
f.Buildings (Control Center) 15,44,08,200.00 15.44 
B Intermediate Entry/Exit
a.Open Cut (Ramps) 3.67 72.77 2,67,35,69,800.00 267.36 
b.Cut And Cover Tunnel 4.26 219.46 9,34,89,96,000.00 934.90 
c.NATM Tunnel 8.61 87.02 7,48,98,11,400.00 748.98 
C Sub Total Cost Of Tunnel Works(A+B) 93,98,03,06,878.80 9,398.03 
D Electro - Mechanical Works @ 8% Of C 7,51,84,24,550.30 751.84 
E Tunnel Ventilation & Fire Fighting 4,84,73,00,000.00 484.73 
G Pavement 46,08,95,480.54 46.09 
H Inter Modal Logistic Building 6,08,81,90,000.00 608.82 
BILL NO. 
4Traffic Signs, Markings, Crash Barrier 
Appurtenances 32,42,87,806.70 32.43 
BILL NO. 
5Road Restoration and Development
a.Reclamation Of Existing Road in 
Approach Area & Ramps68,00,75,000.00 68.01 
b.Street level Development near shaft 
Location (Road, Footpath, Lighting etc.)30,00,00,000.00 30.00 
c.Junction Development 11,56,51,855.12 11.57 Summary  of Cost  Estimate Table 134 : Summary of the Cost
499
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel Proposal
BILL NO. 
6Safety, Environmental Management 
Plan and Traffic Management 
During Construction @ 0.25% on (C) 
Cost of Tunnel Works.23,49,50,767.20 23.50 
BILL 
NO.7High -Capacity & High -Speed Busses 
with Driving And Trailing Coaches 
(Neo -Bus System)
a.Traction & Power Supply (OHE) 50,00,00,000.00 50.00 
b.Telecommunication & Passenger 
Information System10,00,00,000.00 10.00 
c.Fare Collection System 5,00,00,000.00 5.00 
d.Articulated Coach of Minimum 18 M 
Length40,00,00,000.00 40.00 
BILL NO. 
8Miscellaneous (Trees, Artwork in 
Tunnel, Construction Depot & 
Casting Yard, Tree Trans Plantation 
And Landscaping etc.)65,08,23,320.00 65.08 
BILL NO. 
9GPS/GNSS -Based Tolling 10.00 1.10 11,00,00,000.00 11.00 
B) Estimated Construction Cost Without GST 1,16,37,51,00,000.00 11,637.51 
GST @ 18% Payable on Construction Cost Only 
(On B)20,94,75,18,000.00 2,094.75 
C) Construction Cost Including GST 1,37,32,26,18,000.00 13,732 
Contingencies @ 1% Of (B) 1,16,37,51,000.00 116.38 
Construction Supervision Charges @ 2% Of (B) 2,32,75,02,000.00 232.75 
D) Total Cost Including Centages 1,40,81,38,71,000.00 14,081.39 
Land Acquisition, Resettlement, Rehabilitation 
Cost 8,00,00,00,000.00 800.00 
Utility Shifting Cost 1,00,00,00,000.00 100.00 
E) Total Project Cost (Sum of All the Above) 1,49,81,38,71,000.00 14,981.39 Table 135: Summary of the Cost
500
NayandahalliK.R.PuramCORRIDOR
 02
Proposed 
EAST -WEST 
Tunnel 
Corridor from 
K.R.Puram  to 
Nayandahalli
Alignment and Geometry
The proposal  of the project  tunnel  is newly  constructed  a Double  Decker  Tunnel  with  3 lanes  at lower  deck  and 2 lanes  at upper  deck . As 
such  the horizontal  and vertical  is upgraded  as per the design  standard  stipulated  in the manual  and as per relevant  Standards . The 
proposed  project  tunnel  Starts  from  NH-44, & and the total  length  of tunnel  is 18+234 km and in the State  of Karnataka  city Bangalore .
The total  length  of the project  for 
East-West  Corridor  is 28.181 Km. 
The alignment  comprises  of 
structures  like cut & cover,  
underpasses . The proposal  is a two-
deck  system  in which  upper  deck  
(KR Puram  to Nayandahalli  Circle)  
& lower  deck  (Nayandahalli  Circle  
to KR Puram) .
Note : The detailed  Plan,  Profile  & L-
Section  is shown  in Annexure -I & 
Geological  L-Section  is given  in 
Annexure -II.Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan East-West Tunnel
1. Lane  Width
• Width  of carriageway  for lower  deck  of tunnel  is 3 x 3.5 = 10.5 m.
• Width  of carriageway  for upper  deck  of tunnel  is 2 x 3.5 m = 7 m.Figure 407. TBM tunnel proposal alignment (East -West Corridor)PROPOSED ALIGNMENT OPTION STUDY FOR THE EAST -WEST CORRIDOR
502
Existing  Junctions  Along  the Alignment
Table  136.  Existing Junctions along the Alignment
Existing Junctions  
S.No
.Type  of Existing  
JunctionCoordinates Remarks
Northing Easting
1. Y-3 Legged 1437666 .24 m N 788260 .93 m ENear  Gopalan  Signature  Mall
2. Y- 3 Legged 1437233 .04 m N 787341 .00 m ENear  Baiyappanahalli  Depot
3. T- 3 Legged 1436257 .91 m N 787119 .75 m ENear  Chinmaya  Mission  Hospital  
4. X-4 Legged 1436250 .99 m N 786528 .31 m EIndiranagar  
5. T-3 Legged 1436852 .77 m N 786459 .56 m EIndiranagar   
6. X-4 Legged 1436213 .71 m N 786051 .46 m ENear  Indiranagar  Metro  station  intersecting  with  
Road  and proposed  Tunnel  Alignment
7. Y-3 Legged 1436586 .63 m N 785466 .34 m ENear  Murphy  Town  
8. X- 5 Legged 1434967 .69 m N 783303 .97 m ENear  Victoria  Layout  
9. X-4 Legged 1434837 .80 m N 782808 .77 m ENear  BWSSB  Pump  House
10. X-5 Legged 1435462 .35 m N 782833 .78 m EAshok  Nagar  
11. X-4 Legged 1435369 .38 m N 782590 .59 m ENear  Ashok  Nagar  
12. X-4 Legged 1433458 .26 m N 781157 .16 m ENear  Annipura  
13. X-4 Legged 1433207 .13 m N 781064 .94 m EMavalli
14. T-3 Legged 1432900 .84 m N 781371 .25 m EJayanagar
15. X-5 Legged 1433598 .69 m N 779911 .90 m ENear  Vishweshwarapura  
16. Y-3 Legged 1433299 .77 m N 775739 .22 m EMysore  Road  Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan East-West Tunnel
503
Figure 408. 4 & 5 -lane Road TBM Tunnel Typical Cross Section
Figure 409. 6-lane Road TBM Tunnel Typical Cross SectionComprehensive Traffic Management Plan East-West Tunnel
504
Figure 411. 4-Lane Modified Horse Shoe Tunnel Typical Cross Section
Figure 412. 5-Lane Horse Shoe Tunnel Typical Cross SectionComprehensive Traffic Management Plan East-West Tunnel
Figure 410. 4-Lane Horse Shoe Tunnel Typical Cross Section
Figure 413. 5-Lane Modified Horse Shoe Tunnel Typical Cross Section505
Comparison between 5 Lane and 6 Lane Double Deck Tunnel System
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan East-West Tunnel
Figure 414 C/s for Comparison between 5 lane and ^ lane Double Decker Tunnel System
506
Points  Dia. 15.5 m (5 Lane) Dia. 17.2m (6 lane )
Geometry  • Upper  Deck : 2 lanes
• Lower  Deck : 3 lanes
• Total  Lanes : 5 lanes
• Diameter : 15.6 meters· Upper Deck: 3 lanes
· Lower Deck: 3 lanes
· Total Lanes: 6 lanes
·  Diameter: 17.2 meters
Traffic  Volume  Capacity 4500  PCU/hour 5400  PCU/hour
Vehicular  Envelope With  a tighter  diameter,  any extra  space  for 
emergency  breakdown  lanes  or 
maintenance  walkways  is limited . The 
tunnel  design  may  need  to compromise  on 
lane width  or shoulder  space .The larger  diameter  provides  more  flexibility  for 
additional  space .
Potential  for wider  shoulders,  emergency  breakdown  
lanes,  and maintenance  walkways . This  adds  to safety  
and operational  efficiency .
Cost  comparison  The smaller  diameter  (15.6 meters)  
generally  results  in lower  construction  
costs  due to less excavation,  reduced  
material  use, and potentially  lower  costs  
for ventilation  and lighting  systems . 
However,  the cost savings  need  to be 
balanced  against  the reduced  capacity  and 
space  constraints .
Lower  construction  and operational  costs  
but limited  capacity  and flexibility .The larger  diameter  (17.2 meters)  increases  
construction  costs  due to more  excavation,  higher  
material  use, and more  extensive  systems  for 
ventilation  and lighting . However,  these  higher  initial  
costs  are balanced  by the increased  capacity  and 
additional  safety  and operational  benefits .
Higher  construction  and operational  costs  but 
increased  capacity  and flexibility .
Note: Cross -Section of tunnels with different dia are given in Annexure -III.Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan East-West Tunnel
507
Features  of the Stretch
S. No. Location Upper  Deck  Length(m) Lower  Deck  
Length(m)Length  of 
Tunnel  (m)Carriageway  
width  
1. KR Puram,  Vellara  Jn, Gopalan  
Mall  Sirsi  circle,  Nayandhalli  
circle  on Mysore  roadUD1=863
UD2=1007
UD3=1397
UD4=1215
UD5=682
Total  Length= 5164LD1=843
LD2=1014
LD3=1016
LD4=1225
LD5=685
Total  Length= 478318234  10.7 m for Lower 
Deck & 7 m for 
Upper Deck
Note : UD (Upper  Deck)  & LD (Lower  Deck)
TBM Launching, retrieval and Approaches Locations
Figure 415. Upper Deck Entry and Lower Deck Exit (Near KR Pura )Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan East-West Tunnel
508
Figure 416.TBM Launching Location (Jawaharlal Nehru Park)
Figure 417. Upper Deck Exit & Lower Deck Entry (near CV 
Raman General Hospital)Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan East-West Tunnel
Figure  418. Upper Deck Exit & Lower Deck Entry (Near Muniswamy  Garden)
 Figure 419. Upper Deck Exit & Lower Deck Entry
Figure 420. TBM Retrieval Location (near Vrishabawathi  River)
 Figure 421. Upper Deck Exit & Lower Deck Entry ( Nayandalli  Circle on Mysore 
Road)Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan East-West Tunnel
510Intersection  Location  of East -West  and North -South  Corridors
Figure 422. Intersection point of Metro Line, East -West & North -South Corridor at Lalbagh Botanical gardenThe intersection  at the Lalbagh  
Botanical  Garden  is a critical  
point  where  the Metro  Line,  
East-West  Corridor,  and 
North -South  Corridor  
converge . This  junction  
enhances  connectivity  across  
Bangalore  by linking  major  
parts  of the city. 
Existing  Structures  along  the Alignment
Figure 423 FOB near TBM launching locationComprehensive Traffic Management Plan East-West Tunnel
511
Figure 424. Crossing Railway Track at Krishnarajapuram
 Figure 425. Crossing Benniganahalli  Metro Station
Figure 426.. Railway Track Crossing
 Figure 427. Passing through CV Raman General HospitalComprehensive Traffic Management Plan East-West Tunnel
512
Figure 428.. Crossing Metro Track at Indiranagar
Figure 429. Crossing Nallah Location
Figure 431. FOB near Gopalan Mall Sirsi  CircleFigure 430. Crossing Metro track at National CollegeComprehensive Traffic Management Plan East-West Tunnel
513
Figure 432. Y- 3 Legged at Ch.3+200 near Gopalan Signature Mall Figure 433. Y-3 Legged near Baiyappanahalli  Depot Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan East-West Tunnel
514
Figure 434. T-3 Legged near Chinmaya  Mission Hospital 
 Figure 435. X-4 Legged at Indiranagar 
Figure 436. T-3 Legged at Indiranagar   Figure 437.X-4 Legged near Indiranagar Metro station intersecting with Road 
and proposed Tunnel Alignment Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan East-West Tunnel
515
Figure 438. Y-3 Legged near Murphy Town 
Figure 439. X-5 Legged near Victoria Layout 
Figure 440 X-4 Legged near BWSSB Pump House Figure 441.  X-5 Legged at Ashok Nagar Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan East-West Tunnel
516
Figure 442. X-4 Legged near Ashok Nagar 
 Figure 443. X-4 Legged near Annipura
Figure 444.  X-4 Legged at Mavalli Figure 445.  T-3 Legged at JayanagarComprehensive Traffic Management Plan East-West Tunnel
517
Figure 446. X-5 Legged near Vishweshwarapura
 Figure 447. Y-3 Legged on Mysore Road
Traffic  surveys  are essential  tools  for gathering  data  on various  aspects  of traffic  flow,  vehicle  types,  and pedestrian  movements . 
This  information  helps  in planning,  designing,  and managing  transportation  systems . Here  are several  common  traffic  survey  methods :
• Automatic  Traffic  Counting  and Categorization  (ATCC) : A good  traffic  and transportation  study  needs  precision  based  traffic  
counter  as a core component . Such  a road  traffic  survey  helps  to assess  growth  in vehicle  volume  on roads,  the load  borne  by the 
road,  and estimating  traffic  volume . For this road  traffic  survey  exercise,  it is important  to have  near  100% accuracy  in counting  and 
classification  of vehicles  passing  through  a certain  point  in a particular  place . The vehicle  counter  sensor  and video  based  automatic  
traffic  counter  equipment . Every  single  vehicle  passing  through  is counted  and classified  in a supporting  document  for traffic  count  
data  analysis .
• Turning  Movement  Surveys : Get precise  data  on how  traffic  moves  at intersections  and the time  and volume  of cars that pass  
through  a given  time . This  allows  optimization  of intersection  route  and movement  for better  traffic  flow .
 Traffic  Survey  Locations
As part of our comprehensive  traffic  survey  in Bangalore,  we have  strategically  positioned  cameras  at various  key locations  throughout  the 
city to capture  detailed  traffic  data . The following  table  lists the locations  of these  cameras  along  with  their  geographical  coordinates :
Table 137 Traffic Survey Locations
ID Longitude Latitude Place
CAM -1 77.6938372 13.0083663 K R Puram
CAM -2 77.6783191 13.0002791 Near  K R Puram  Metro  Station
CAM -3 77.6627282 12.9939261 Near  Gopalan  Signature  Mall
CAM -4 77.6285885 12.9783197 Near  Shri Venkataramana  Swamy  Temple
CAM -5 77.6142706 12.9684 Near  Welcomhotel  by ITC Hotel
CAM -6 77.6067797 12.9664605 Near  Shoolay  Circle
CAM -7 77.5971007 12.9649311 Richmond  Circle
CAM -8 77.5416911 12.9531188 Near  Shri Gali Anjaneya  Swamy  Temple
CAM -9 77.5300857 12.9441248 Nayandahalli  JunctionComprehensive Traffic Management Plan East-West TunnelTRAFFIC SURVEY
518
Traffic Composition
The traffic  composition  data  of Bangalore  gives  us important  information  about  the types  of vehicles  on the city’s  roads . The pie chart  shows  
the different  kinds  of vehicles,  such  as two-wheelers,  cars,  buses,  trucks,  and bicycles . This  information  helps  us understand  how  busy  the 
roads  are and what  kinds  of vehicles  are most  common . By looking  at this data,  we can figure  out where  traffic  jams  happen  most  often  and 
plan  how  to improve  the roads . This  analysis  is essential  for making  Bangalore’s  traffic  flow  more  smoothly  and ensuring  the city can handle  
more  vehicles  as it grows .
49%
5%
37%
1%
8%
0%Traffic composition at K R Puram 
car
Truck
Two wheeler
Bus
Three wheeler
LCV
Figure 448.Traffic Composition at KR Puram.Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan East-West Tunnel
519
Peak  Hour  Traffic
Peak  hour  traffic  refers  to the time  period  when  traffic  volume  on a highway  reaches  its highest  capacity,  causing  congestion  and reduced  
vehicle  speeds . It occurs  during  morning  and evening  rush  hours,  driven  by commuter  travel  patterns  and roadway  capacity  constraints .
The peak  hour  traffic  in PCU/Hour  at various  location  has been  given  below :
Table 138.  Peak Hour traffic in PCU/ hr
S.No. Location Of Traffic Camera Existing  Traffic  @ Peak  Hour  (PCU/Hr)
1 K R Puram 5099
2 Near K R Puram Metro Station 6019
3 Near  Gopalan  Signature  Mall 4936
4 Near  Shri Venkataramana  Swamy  Temple 5182
5 Near  Welcome  hotel  by ITC Hotel 697
6 Near  Shoolay  Circle 2823
7 Richmond  Circle 2634
8 Near Shri Gali Anjaneya Swamy Temple 7605
9 Nayandahalli  Junction 5252
Traffic  Analysis
Traffic  analysis  involves  the systematic  study  and interpretation  of traffic  data  to understand  patterns,  volumes,  and flow  characteristics  on 
roadways . It utilizes  various  methodologies  and tools  to assess  congestion,  determine  capacity  utilization,  and inform  transportation  
planning  and infrastructure  improvements  for efficient  traffic  management .
S. No.Location Traffic  in 2024
(PCU/day)Expected traffic 
in 2039 
(PCU/day)Expected traffic 
in 2044 
(PCU/day)Expected traffic in 
2049 (PCU/day)
1 K R Puram 42020 87341 98818 111804
2 K R Puram Metro Station 52970 110106 124575 140945
3 Gopalan Signature Mall 45620 94830 107292 121391Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan East-West Tunnel
Table 139.  Traffic Analysis  Sheet
520
4 Shri Venkataramana Swamy 
Temple42410 88162 99747 112855
5 Welcomhotel by ITC Hotel 5370 11151 12617 14275
6 Shoolay Circle 22690 47165 53363 60375
7 Richmond Circle 19410 40351 45654 51653
8 Shri Gali Anjaneya Swamy Temple 33950 70568 79841 90333
9 Nayandahalli Junction 51150 106326 120299 136107
Note : The detailed  traffic  analysis  are given  in annexure -IV.
Service  Volume  Recommendations
Indo  HCM  Table  4.9 defines  Levels  of Service  (LOS)  for an 8-lane divided  urban  expressway  based  on traffic  density,  V/C  ratio,  and daily  
service  volume  thresholds . LOS  ranges  from  A to E, guiding  engineers  in managing  traffic  flow  and determining  design  strategies  to 
optimize  roadway  performance .
Table 167. Indo HCM Table 4.9 LOS Threshold for 8 -Lane divided Urban Expressway
LOS DENSITY (PCU/km/direction) V/C ratioService Volume 
(PCU/Day)Recommended DSV
A <=30 <=0.25 < 47600
69600 @ LOS BB 31-62 0.26-0.50 47601 -91500
C 63-103 0.51-0.75 91501 -137300
D 104-167 0.76-0.93 137301 -170200
E 168-204 0.94-1.00 170201 -183000
The traffic  study  in Bangalore  covers  diverse  surveys  and analyses  essential  for urban  transportation  planning . It includes  detailed  traffic  
patterns  at key locations  like K R Puram  and Richmond  Circle,  insights  into vehicle  composition,  and peak  hour  traffic  data . Indo  HCM  
Table  4.9 provides  guidelines  for managing  traffic  volume  and achieving  optimal  roadway  performance  through  recommended  service  
volumes  and Levels  of Service  (LOS)  thresholds . These  findings  inform  strategies  to enhance  traffic  flow  and prepare  for future  growth  in 
the city's  traffic  demands .Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan East-West Tunnel
521
ADVANTAGE  OF UNDERGROUND  STRUCTURE  OVER  ELEVATED  STRUCTURE
Choosing  between  a tunnel  system  and an elevated  structure  for urban  transportation  involves  considering  various  factors  such  as aesthetics,  
land  use, environmental  impact,  and practical  engineering  challenges . Here  are some  reasons  why  a tunnel  system  might  be preferred  over  
an elevated  structure  in a city:
         Aesthetics  and Urban  Landscape  
                   Visual  Impact :
• Tunnels : Being  underground,  tunnels  do not alter  the city's  skyline  or visual  landscape . This  is particularly  important  in cities  with  
historic  architecture  or scenic  views .
• Elevated  Structures : These  can be visually  intrusive  and can negatively  impact  the aesthetics  of a city. Elevated  tracks,  stations,  and 
supporting  structures  can disrupt  the visual  harmony  of urban  environments .
             Land  Use and Space
Surface  Land  Availability :
• Tunnels : Tunnels  preserve  the surface  land,  allowing  it to be used  for other  purposes  like parks,  pedestrian  zones,  or additional  
buildings . This  is particularly  valuable  in densely  populated  urban  areas  where  land  is scarce  and expensive .
• Elevated  Structures : Require  significant  space  for pillars,  tracks,  and stations . This  can lead  to the reduction  of available  land  for other  
uses  and may  disrupt  existing  urban  layouts .
        Environmental  Impact
Noise  Pollution :
• Tunnels : Underground  systems  significantly  reduce  noise  pollution  compared  to elevated  structures . The noise  from  trains  or vehicles  
is contained  within  the tunnel,  minimizing  disturbance  to residents  and businesses .
• Elevated  Structures : Generate  considerable  noise,  especially  when  trains  or vehicles  are running . This  noise  can affect  nearby  
residential  areas,  businesses,  and public  spaces .
Environmental  Disruption :
• Tunnels : Though  their  construction  is complex,  once  completed,  tunnels  have  a minimal  impact  on the surface  environment . They  do 
not disrupt  the ecosystem  and can even  run beneath  existing  structures  without  affecting  them.Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan East-West Tunnel
522
• Elevated  Structures : Can disrupt  local  ecosystems  and require  removal  or modification  of existing  structures  and landscapes . They  can 
also create  barriers  for wildlife  and human  movement .
           Safety  and Weather  Protection
Safety :
• Tunnels : Generally  considered  safer  in terms  of protecting  transportation  systems  from  weather -related  disruptions . They  are shielded  
from  extreme  weather  conditions  such  as heavy  rain,  snow,  and wind .
• Elevated  Structures : More  exposed  to weather  conditions,  which  can lead to operational  disruptions  and maintenance  challenges . They  
are also more  susceptible  to natural  disasters  such  as earthquakes  and hurricanes .
       Urban  Integration
Traffic  and Pedestrian  Flow :
• Tunnels : Do not interfere  with  surface -level  traffic  and pedestrian  flow . This  is particularly  advantageous  in congested  urban  areas  
where  maintaining  smooth  surface -level  traffic  is crucial .
• Elevated  Structures : Can create  barriers  at the street  level,  disrupting  traffic  flow  and making  pedestrian  movement  more  difficult . The 
need  for support  pillars  and elevated  stations  can also limit  accessibility  and connectivity .
       Construction  and Maintenance
Construction  Impact :
• Tunnels : While  tunnel  construction  is complex  and expensive,  modern  tunneling  technologies  (e.g., tunnel  boring  machines)  can 
minimize  surface  disruption . Construction  activities  are largely  confined  underground,  reducing  the impact  on daily  life.
• Elevated  Structures : Construction  is typically  more  disruptive  to the surface  environment . Building  pillars  and elevated  tracks  often  
requires  significant  alteration  of existing  infrastructure  and can cause  prolonged  surface -level  disruptions .
Maintenance :
• Tunnels : Although  maintenance  of tunnels  can be challenging  due to their  underground  location,  modern  monitoring  and 
maintenance  technologies  can manage  these  tasks  effectively .
• Elevated  Structures : Maintenance  activities  often  require  surface -level  disruptions,  such  as lane closures  or traffic  diversions,  which  
can inconvenience  urban  residents  and commuters .Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan East-West Tunnel
523
Cost Considerations
Initial Costs:
• Tunnels: Typically involve higher initial construction costs due to the complexity of excavation and engineering required. Ho wev er, 
the long -term benefits in terms of reduced surface disruption and maintenance can justify the investment.
• Elevated Structures: Generally have lower initial construction costs compared to tunnels but can result in higher long -term soci al 
and environmental costs due to their impact on the urban landscape and ongoing maintenance needs.
        Conclusion
While tunnel systems present higher initial costs and engineering challenges, their benefits in terms of aesthetics, land use , environmental 
impact, safety, and urban integration often make them a preferred choice in urban settings. Elevated structures, despite bein g more 
economical to construct initially, can disrupt the urban environment and impose long -term challenges that may outweigh their cos t 
advantages.Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan East-West Tunnel
524
COST  ESTIMATE
Table 140 BOQ for East West Corridor (Single Tube TBM Tunnel)
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan East-West Tunnel
525
Table 141. BOQ for Twin Tube TBM Tunnel
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan East-West Tunnel
526
07 . 
Travel 
Demand
 Model
Forecast
   
                     
                
                    
                      
             
                 
                          
Figure 449 : Study AreaZoning 
Traffic  Analysis  Zones  (TAZs)  are 
geographically  defined  areas  that are used  
to model  traffic  flow  and demand  within  a 
transportation  network . These  zones  
typically  represent  neighbourhoods,  
commercial  districts,  industrial  areas,  or 
other  distinct  land -use zones . By dividing  
a study  area into TAZs,  transportation  
planners  can analyse  traffic  patterns,  
forecast  future  demand,  and evaluate  the 
effectiveness  of various  transportation  
improvement  projects . The size and shape  
of TAZs  can vary  depending  on the 
specific  study  objectives  and the 
characteristics  of the study  area.
In CMP  2020  ward  boundaries  were  taken  as TAZs . As this study  is related  to the estimation  of traffic  on proposed  
North -South  Corridor,  therefore  the wards  along  the proposed  corridor  are sub-divided  into smaller  zones  up to an 
influence  area  of approximately  2 km (Zone  1 to 74) and these  zones  are considered  as internal  zones  for this study . The 
Wards  outside  the influence  area  are clubbed  into larger  zones  (Zone  201 to 307) and these  are the immediate  external  
zones . The area  outside  the BBMP  is divided  into 4 Zones  i.e. Zone  no. 501, 502, 503 and 504 based  on direction  (North,  
West,  South  and East respectively) . Figure  46 shown  the TAZs  of study  area .
528
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
528
   
                     
                
                    
                      
             
                 
                          Figure 450 : Zoning of Study AreaRoad Network
Bengaluru's  road  network  is a 
testament  to the city's  rapid  growth  
and development,  boasting  a vast 
expanse  of arterial  roads,  sub-
arterial  roads,  and Collector  roads  as 
shown  in Figure  47. 
Figure  451: Bengaluru Road Network
529
 Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
529
City Urban Transport Scenario and Secondary Data Information
City  Profile
Bengaluru,  the capital  of Karnataka,  is a bustling  metropolis  renowned  
as India’s  "Silicon  Valley,"  largely  due to its influential  technology  sector . 
With  a population  of over  12 million,  it ranks  among  the most  populous  
cities  in India . Despite  its economic  vitality,  Bengaluru  faces  significant  
challenges  related  to traffic  and transportation . The city's  rapid  
urbanization  has led to severe  traffic  congestion,  exacerbated  by an 
influx  of vehicles  and inadequate  road  infrastructure . Although  
Bengaluru  boasts  an expanding  metro  system  and a well -developed  
road  network,  these  developments  have  struggled  to keep  pace  with  the 
growing  demand . Addressing  these  traffic  and infrastructure  issues  
remains  crucial  for maintaining  the city’s  economic  and livability  
standards .
Population
Population  of Bengaluru  Metropolitan  Area  has been  growing  since  
independence  as shown  in Figure  48. The BMA  area,  which  had a 
population  of about  17 Lakh  in 1971 , reached  85 lakhs  in 2011 . 
Bengaluru  was one of the fastest -growing  Indian  metropolises  for the 
decade  1991 –2011 . It has an average  density  of about  148 people  / 
hectare . In CMP  2020  the estimated  population  is 122.98 Lakh  for 2018 .
16.6429.2241.3757.0185.2122.98
050100150
1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020POPULATION 
(LAKHS)
YEAR
Figure 452: Growth of Population in BMARoad  Network
Bengaluru  is endowed  with  a ring radial  pattern  of road  
network  in the core area of the city. Bengaluru's  road  network,  
spanning  14,000 km of the road  network  consists  of ring roads,  
major  roads  (arterial  roads,  sub-arterial  roads  and other  
mobility  corridors)  and residential  streets . However,  there  is 
no clear  hierarchy  of roads,  and this situation  has resulted  in 
low speeds,  increased  conflicts  of traffic,  etc. Though  there  is a 
large  network  of roads  in the city, the major  arterial  road  
network  comprised  less than  20% of the total  road  network  in 
the city. The major  roads  in the study  area are shown  in Figure  
501.
Figure 453 : Road Network of Bengaluru City530
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
530
Bus
The bus system  operated  by BMTC  has been  the primary  public  transport  system  in Bengaluru  City . BMTC  has established  45 depots  for 
providing  services  in the city. BMTC  is operating  6143  schedules  (as of Aug  2018 ) every  day. The Physical  performance  of BMTC  is 
presented  in Table  170.Overview of Public Transport 
Table 170: Bus Performance in Bengaluru
Metro
Two  corridors  of Metro  Rail are in operation  in Bengaluru . One is the East-West  corridor,  and the other  is the North -South  corridor . The 
East-West  Corridor  starts  at Baiyappanahalli  (R1) and ends  at Mysore  Road  (R2). The North -South  Corridor  starts  at Nagasandra  (R3) and 
ends  at Puttenahalli  (R4). The total  length  of the Metro  Rail network  under  operation  is 42.30 Km. Table  46 presents  the operational  metro  
in Bengaluru .
Sub-Urban  Rail
Bengaluru  city has a good  rail network  of about  62 km within  the city. There  are a few diesels  operated  passenger  trains  that connect  to 
Bengaluru  City with  Tumkur , Mysore  and Kuppam  (Andhra  Pradesh) . The trains  run in the morning  and return  in the evening  catering  
to commuters  from  suburban  areas,  satellite  towns  and neighboring  cities . They  are well patronized  and in the recent  past the patronage  
has shown  a good  growth  rate. But their  frequency  and availability  are not adequate  to make  this as primary  / preferred  mode  of 
transportation . The utilization  of existing  railway  network  in the city for running  robust  sub-urban  rail services  connecting  the peripheral  
areas  and settlements  around  Bengaluru  is being  explored  and a detailed  study  has been  made  by Indian  Railways  to introduce  a 
commuter  rail service  including  identifying  the improvement  requirement  to the railway  network .
531
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
531
Table 142: Metro Corridors along with Stretches and their Status
S. No. CorridorLength
(km)Status
Phase 1
1Baiyappanahalli  
to Mysore  Road  
(East  - West  
Corridor - 
Purple  Line)  (R1 
& R2)18.1 Operational
2Nagasandra  to 
Yelachenahalli  
(North - South  
Corridor - Green  
Line)  (R3 & R4)24.2 Operational
Vehicle  Growth  in the City
Bengaluru  City has a total registered  vehicular  count  of approximately  1 
crore  vehicles  in 2023 , vehicle  has grown  at an average  growth  rate of 
8% over the past 10 years . The vehicle  registration  trend  is shown  in 
below .
45.950.555.661.168.374.180.5 83.887.893.8100.9
0.020.040.060.080.0100.0120.0
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024VEHICLES (IN LAKH)
YEARTransport  and Infrastructure  Proposals  
Road
Currently  there  are three  road projects  that are sanctioned  in 
Bengaluru,  which  are Satellite  Town  Ring  Road,  Intermediate  
Ring  Road  and Peripheral  Ring  Road  as shown  in Figure .
a) Satellite  Town  Ring  Road : To ensure  safe, smooth,  efficient,  and 
high-speed  transport  corridor  to Bangalore  city, it is impetus  that 
the infrastructure  of city and adjoining  towns  anticipated  the 
development . National  Highways  NH 648 (NH 207), NH 48 (NH 
4), NH 275, NH 948, NH 209 & NH 75 (Hassan  road),  and 
majority  of State  Highways  SH 3, SH 85, & SH 35 pass through  
Bangalore  city comprising  heavy  commercial  traffic  movement . 
Most  of this traffic  are not intend  to pass through  the Bangalore  
city. This traffic  further  aggravate  the scenario  in the city roads  
and resulting  huge  traffic  jams.
b) Peripheral  Ring  Road : The proposed  “Peripheral  Ring  Road”  is 
65 km long and connects  10 major  Highways  namely  Tumkur  
Road(NH -4), Hesaraghatta  Road(SH -39), Doddaballapura  
Road(SH -09), Bellary  Road  (NH-7), Hennur - Baglur  Road  (SH-
104), OMR  (NH-4), Whitefield  road,  Channasandra  Main  Road,  
Hoskote -Anekal  Road(SH -35), Sarjapur  Road  and Hosur  
Road(NH -7). Overall,  it intersects  4 National  Highways  and 6 
state Highways . The proposed  PRR  length  from  start point  on 
Tumkur  road upto end point  on Hosur  road is 64.201 Km. Since,  
the alignment  is getting  integrated  with NICE  road on Tumkur  
road (~ 368m) and Hosur  road (~ 546m), the total length  of the 
project  road is considered  to be 65.115 Km.
Figure 454: Vehicular growth in Bengaluru
532
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
532
   
                     
                
                    
                      
             
                 
                          Figure 455 : Proposed Roads in Bengaluru
Metro
Transport  Demand  Forecast  Study  and Identification  of Phase  III Corridors  of Bengaluru  Metro  was undertaken  by Bengaluru  Metro  
Rail Corporation  Limited  (BMRCL)  to extend  the metro  system  in Phase -III for the areas  not covered  by Phase -I & II and interconnect  
the metro  system  network  as shown  in Figure  52. All metro  routes  of Phase -I are operational,  some  routes  of Phase -II are operational,  
and the rest are ongoing  projects  and all routes  in Phase -III are the upcoming  projects  as given  in the metro  DPRs . The details  of Phase -I, 
Phase -II and Phase -III are shown  in Table  172 &173533
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
533
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan North -South Tunnel ProposalS.
NoPhase DetailLength in KM No of Stations
UG Elevated Total UG Elevated Total
1 Phase  1Mysore  Road  To Kempegowda  Metro  Station,  Majestic,  
Kempe  Gowda  Metro  Station  Majestic  to 
Baiyappanahalli , Nagasandra  To Yeshwantpur , 
Yeshwantpur  To Kempegowda  Metro  Station  Majestic,  
Kempegowda  Metro  Station  Majestic  To Yelachenahalli8.79 33.51 42.3 9 34 43
2 Phase  2Baiyappanahalli  to Krishnaraja  Pura,  Kengeri  to 
Challaghatta,  Krishnarajapura  To Whitefield,  
Yelachenahalli  To Silk Institute,  Kengeri  To Mysore  
Road- 31.51 31.51 - 27 27
3 Phase 2Nagasandra  to Madavara  (BIEC),Bommasandra  to 
Beratena  Agrahara,  Beratena  Agrahara  To 
Bommanahalli,  Bommanahalli  To R.V. 
Road,Kalena  Agrahara  To Tavarekere , Tavarekere  
to Rashtriya  Military  School,  Rashtriya  Military  
School  To Shivajinagar,  Shivajinagar  Station  to 
Tannery  Road,  Tannery  Road  To Nagawara13.88 29.66 43.54 12 25 37
4 Phase 2ACentral  Silk Board  To Kadubeesanahalli,  
Kodibeesanahalli  To K.R. Puram- 19.75 19.75 - 13 13
5 Phase 2BKasturi  Nagar  To Kempapura , Hebbal  To Bagalur  
Cross,  Bettahalasuru  To KIA Terminal- 38.44 38.44 - 17 17Table 143: Merto  Ongoing Projects
S. No PhaseSection Length in KM No of Stations
From To UG Elevated Total UG Elevated Total
1 Phase -31. Hebbal 1. J.P. Nagar 4th Phase
-31
43 40 40
2. Hosahalli 2. Kadabagere 12
2 Phase -3A 1. Sarjapur 1. Hebbal 17 19 36 14 15 29Table 173 : Metro Up coming Projects
534
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
534
   
                     
                
                    
                      000Figure 456 : Bengaluru metro network535
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
535
Travel  Characteristics  
This  section  discussed  the trip characteristics  based  on the CMP  2020  
report . These  trip characteristics  will be used  the validate  the outputs  
from  this study .
Mode  Share  Motorized  trips
The modal  split  of motorized  trips  referred  from  CMP  2020  is shown  in 
Table  144.
Table 144  : Mode Share (Motorized Trips)
S. No. Mode No. of trips  Trips
1 Car/Taxi 264649 21.0%
2 2-Wheeler 296468 23.5%
3 Auto  Rikshaw 96655 7.7%
4 Public  Transport 601861 47.8%
Total 1259633 100%
Mode  wise  Distribution  of Average  Trip  Length  
Average  trip length  as per CMP  2020  by mode  of travel  is presented  in 
Table  175. Average  trip length  for walk  is 1.0 Km, for 2-wheeler  8.0 
km, for car and taxi is 12.8 km and 13.1 km respectively  and for Bus it 
is about  10.7 km.
S. No. Mode Average Trip Length (Km)
1 Car 12.8
2 Taxi 13.1
3 Shared Taxi 15.4
4 2- Wheelers 8
5 Auto 3.7
6 Bus 10.7
7 Minibus 10.7
8 School Bus 5.1
9 Chartered Bus 15.1
10 Cycle 2.6
11 Walk 1Table 145 : Mode Wise Average Trip LengthTravel Demand Assessment
The travel  demand  assessment  was carried  out in the CMP  2020  
with  the focus  to develop  a long -term  transportation  strategy  for 
Bengaluru  with  the help  of an urban  transport  planning  model . The 
outputs  from  the CMP  will be used  for trips  forecasting  for the 
current  study . This  section  summarizes  the main  outputs . 
Population  Forecasting
The population  in CMP  2020  has been  forecasted  up to year  2051  
shown  below  in Table  146 The population  of BMA  Area  and 
Extended  Area  has been  forecasted  separately .
Table 146: Forecasted population in CMP Study Area
Area 2015 2031 2041 2051
BMA 1,12,27,977 2,03,13,499 2,57,09,017 3,16,36,758 
Extended  
Area2,55,449 5,50,000 8,95,892 16,04,406
Total 1,14,83,426 2,08,63,499 2,66,04,909 3,32,41,165
Scenarios
For horizon  year  mode  share  and average  trip lengths,  CMP  2020  
will be referred  where  the projections  have  been  done  in various  
scenarios . The scenarios  are given  below :
a) Scenario  1: Business  as Usual  scenario
The mode  share  and average  trip length  calculated  in the 
Scenario  1 are shown  in Table  147
ModesPeak Hour 
TripsBase Year 
(2015)BAU (2031)
Mode SharePeak Hour 
TripsMode Share
Car + Taxi 264649 21% 689673 30%
Two -
Wheeler296468 24% 666685 29%
Auto  
Rickshaw96655 8% 114946 5%
Public  
Transport601861 48% 827608 36%
Total 1259633 2298912Table 147 : Comparison of Travel Characteristics between Base Year and Horizon Year
536
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
536
Scenario  2: Public  Transport  Augmentation  and Efficiency  
Improvement,  and Multimodal  Transport .
The mode  share  calculated  in the Scenario  2 are 
shown  in Table  148.
ModesBAU  (2031 ) Scenario  2
Peak  Hour  
TripsMode  
SharePeak  Hour  
TripsMode  
Share
Car + Taxi 689673 30% 572638 25%
Two -
Wheeler666685 29% 304780 13%
Auto  
Rickshaw114946 5% 71406 3%
Public  
Transport827608 36% 1350088 59%
Total 2298912 2298912Table 148: Forecast Mode Share – Scenario 2
Scenario  3 – Public  Transport  Augmentation  Plus  Enhances  
capacity  and Efficiency  of Road  Infrastructure .
The mode  share  calculated  in the Scenario  1 are shown  
in Table  149.
ModesBAU  (2031 ) Scenario  3
Peak  Hour  
TripsMode  
SharePeak  Hour  
TripsMode  
Share
Car + Taxi 689673 30% 532581 23%
Two -
Wheeler666685 29% 261240 11%
Auto  
Rickshaw114946 5% 67922 3%
Public  
Transport827608 36% 1437168 68%
Total 2298912 2298912Scenario  4 – Comprehensive  Mobility  Strategy : Transit  Oriented  
Development,  Factoring -in full cost of externalities,  Regulations  on 
private  vehicles,  besides  Public  Transport  Augmentation  Plus  Enhances  
Capacity  and efficiency  of Road  Infrastructure,  and cleaner  technology  
Vehicles .The mode  share  calculated  in the Scenario  4 are shown  in Table  
150 .
Table 149: Forecast Mode Share – Scenario 3Table 150: Forecast Mode Share – Scenario 4
ModesBAU  (2031 ) Scenario  3
Peak  Hour  
TripsMode  SharePeak  Hour  
TripsMode  Share
Car + Taxi 689673 30% 394472 17%
Two -Wheeler 666685 29% 181126 8%
Auto  
Rickshaw114946 5% 42669 2%
Public  
Transport827608 36% 1680644 73%
Total 2298912 2298912
Primary Data Collection and analysis
In any transport  planning  exercise,  data  collection  is the cornerstone  
and the very  foundation  on which  rests  the superstructure . The data,  
so collected,  is used  to analyze  the existing  transport  and traffic  
situation  in the study  area and to develop  an urban  transport  demand  
model  for the study  area. This  activity  is undertaken  to understand  
traffic  and travel  characteristics  and highlight  city-specific  problems . 
The first and foremost  step to initiate  in the development  of a 
transport  demand  model  is the collection  of relevant  data  to 
understand  travel  patterns  and the factors  that influence  them . These  
travel  patterns  shall  be the guiding  principles  in determining  the 
traffic  on the north -south  corridor . The following  surveys  were  carried  
out as shown  in Table   to meet  the above  objectives . 
537
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
537
Table 151: Survey Details
S. 
No.Particulars  of 
SurveyUnit QuantitySurvey  
Date
1Classified  Traffic  
Volume  CountLocation 9 Aug -2024
2Turning  Moment  
Count  at 
IntersectionsLocation 7 Aug -2024
3Passenger  
Origin -
Destination  
SurveyLocations 11 Aug -2024
4Speed  and delay  
surveyKM 25 Aug -2024
Figure 457 : Survey LocationsTraffic Conditions
Objective  of Survey : Surveys  were  conducted  at critical  identified  locations  
along  the proposed  NS Corridor .
Scope  of Survey : Counting  of vehicles,  classified  by the type  of vehicle,  at 
selected  locations,  covering  all turning  movements,  midblock  & screen  line.
Conduct : Videographic  traffic  counts  were  carried  out at all the locations  
listed . At each  identified  station,  both  directional  counts  were  done  by 
vehicle  type,  i.e., fast-moving  passenger  vehicles,  goods  vehicles  and slow -
moving  non-motorized  vehicles . The vehicles  counted  were  converted  to 
Passenger  Car Units  (PCU)  by adopting  equivalent  PCUs . The PCUs  
corresponding  to urban  roads  as per IRC: 106-1990  is used  and the values  
adopted  are given  in Table  151 below .
538
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
538
Table 152: PCU Values for Different Categories of Vehicles
Vehicle  TypePCU  Values
Urban  
UP TO 
5%> 
5%
Bus 2.2 3.7
Car/Jeep/Van/Taxi 1 1
Two -Wheeler 0.5 0.75
E-Rickshaw 1.2 2
Auto -Rickshaw 1.2 2
Truck 2.2 3.7
MAV 4 5
LCV 1.4 2
Cycle 0.4 0.5
Tractor 4 5
Cart 2 3
Cycle  Rickshaw 1.5 2
Traffic  Volume  Counts  at Cordon  Points
Nine  cordon  points  were  identified  for an 
understanding  of the traffic  characteristics  in 
the study  area. The analysis  of the classified  
volume  count  survey  at the cordons  is given  
in the sub-sections  below . The total  inbound  
and outbound  traffic  flow  at each  of the 
cordons  is presented  in Table  153 and daily  
traffic  on each  cordon  point  is shown  in 
Figure   direction  wise .Location DirectionDaily 
Vehicl
es per 
Directi
onDaily 
PCUs 
per 
Directio
nTotal 
Daily 
VehiclesTotal 
Daily 
PCUs
1NH-44 Bellary  Road  (Near -
Sakar  Nagar)Dir-I : Yelahanka  To Hebbal 144592 138970
288243 276854 Dir-II : Hebbal  To 
Yelahanka143651 137884
2NH-75 Malur  -Byranahalli  
Rd Outer  Ring  Road  (Near -
Nagavara  park)Dir-I : Bellary  Road  To 
Nagavara117553 113677
222323 212544Dir-II :Nagavara  To Bellary  
Road104770 98867
3NH-75 Malur  -Byranahalli  
Rd Outer  Ring  Road  (Near -
Devinagar  BEL Circle)Dir-I : Hebbal  To 
Yashwantpur74262 74124
139793 140205Dir-II : Yashwantpur  To 
Hebbal65531 66081
4AH-47 Malur  Road  (Near -
Science  Gallery)Dir-I : Mekhri  circle  To 
Airport128808 122070
246077 232456Dir-II : Airport  To Mekhri  
circle117269 110386
5Guttahalli  Main  Road  
(Near -Uniworth  Plaza)Dir-I : Mahalakshmi  Gudi  
Circle  To Bengaluru  Golf  
Club103247 97762
203804 195093Dir-II : Bengaluru  Golf  Club  
To Mahalakshmi  Gudi  
Circle100557 97332
6NR road  (Near -Silver  
Jubilee  Park)Dir-I : Kempegowda  Tower  
To Chamrajpet82397 83027
180589 177180Dir-II : Chamrajpet  To 
Kempegowda  Tower98192 94154
7Siddapura  Road  (Near -
Maharaja  Agrasena  
Bhavana)Dir-I : Ashoka  Piller  To 
Mallinge  Hospital31705 28716
65075 58422Dir-II : Mallinge  Hospital  
To Ashoka  Piller33370 29706
8Marigowda  Road  (Near -
National  Institute  Of 
Mental  Health  & Neuro  
Sciences)Dir-I : Dairy  Circle  To 
Wilson  Garden54855 54282
108421 107685Dir-II :Wilson  Garden  To 
Dairy  Circle53566 53402
9NH-44 Bengaluru -Chennai  
Highway  (Near -Madiwala  
footbridge)Dir-I : Adugodi  To 
Electronic  City117725 109335 232494 216724Table 153: Daily Traffic Volume Counts at Cordon Locations
539
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
539
Figure 458: Map Showing Daily Traffic Volume at Count Locations.
Figure   presents  the overall  vehicle  composition  of the traffic . 
The highest  share  is of private  vehicles,  at 80%, of which  two-
wheelers  constitute  42% and four-wheelers  38%. This  is 
followed  by IPT vehicles,  which  contribute  to about  9% of the 
total  traffic . 
45%
34%4%8%3%5%1%Vehicle Composition
2-Wheeler Car Taxi Auto
Bus LCV Truck Cycle
Cycle-Rkishaw Other
The temporal  variation  of the traffic  flow  at each  cordon  is 
given  in Figure  below . Based  on primary  data  for all the 
cordons,  the morning  peak  period  can be considered  from  
09:00 to 12:00 hours  and the evening  peak  period  can be 
considered  from  17:00 to 20:00 hours .02000400060008000100001200014000160001800020000
08.00 -09.00
09.00 -10.00
10.00 -11.00
11.00 -12.00
12:00 -13:00
13:00 -14:00
14:00 -15:00
15:00 -16:00
16:00 -17:00
17:00 -18:00
18:00 -19:00
19:00 -20:00PCUS
TIMETemporal Distribution of traffic Flow
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Figure 459: Temporal Distribution of traffic at cordon pointsFigure : Overall traffic composition
540
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
540
The peak  volume  and peak  period  at each  cordon  location  are given  in Table  154 below  . The volume  in the peak  hour  varies  in the range  
of 7-8% of the total  volume .
Table 154: Morning Peak hour Volume at Surveyed Locations
Location DirectionBoth 
Direction 
VehiclesPeak 
VehiclesSegregated 
Peak VehiclesBoth 
Direction 
PCUsPeak PCUsSegregated 
Peak PCUsPeak 
Hour %Level of Service Peak Time
1NH-44 Bellary 
Road (Near -Sakar 
Nagar)Dir-I : Yelahanka 
To Hebbal 
(Towards 
Bengaluru)
1975597946335
1796789625718
6%LOS F
09.00 -10.00Dir I - Service Lane 
(Towards 
Bengaluru)3459 3244 LOS E
Dir-II : Hebbal To 
Yelahanka 
(Towards Airport)9961 9634 9005 8627 LOS F
2NH-75 Malur  -
Byranahalli  Rd 
Outer Ring Road 
(Near -Nagavara  
park)Dir-I : Bellary Road 
To Nagavara
1386577284945
1244170113797
6%LOS C
09.30 -10.30Dir I - Service Lane 2785 2321 LOS E
Dir-II :Nagavara  To 
Bellary Road 6137444054303377 LOS C
Dir II - Service Lane 1697 1242 LOS C
3NH-75 Malur -
Byranahalli Rd 
Outer Ring Road 
(Near -Devinagar 
BEL Circle)Dir-I : Hebbal To 
Yashwantpur
105635567 5567
96635171 5171
7%LOS F
10.15 -11.15 Dir-II : 
Yashwantpur  To 
Hebbal4996 4996 4493 4493 LOS E
4AH-47 Malur Road 
(Near -Science 
Gallery)Dir-I : Mekhri  circle 
To Airport
1715689145568
1544379884996
7%LOS E
09.00 -10.00Dir I - Service Lane 3346 2991 LOS F
Dir-II : Airport To 
Mekhri  circle 8242574374555362 LOS F
Dir II - Service Lane 2499 2093 LOS D
541
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
541
The peak  volume  and peak  period  at each  cordon  location  are given  in Table  155 below  . The volume  in the peak  hour  varies  in the range  of 
7-8% of the total  volume .
Table 155: Morning Peak hour Volume at Surveyed Locations
5Guttahalli  Main 
Road (Near -
Uniworth  Plaza)Dir-I : 
Mahalakshmi Gudi  
Circle To 
Bengaluru Golf 
Club 137778129 8129
126517318 7318
6.5%LOS F
09.15 -10.15
Dir-II : Bengaluru 
Golf Club To 
Mahalakshmi Gudi  
Circle5648 5648 5333 5333 LOS F
6NR road (Near -
Silver Jubilee Park)Dir-I : 
Kempegowda 
Tower To 
Chamrajpet 127534814 4814
117734534 4534
6.64%LOS D
09.30 -10.30
Dir-II : Chamrajpet  
To Kempegowda  
Tower7938 7938 7240 7240 LOS F
7Siddapura Road 
(Near -Maharaja 
Agrasena 
Bhavana)Dir-I : Ashoka 
Piller To Mallinge 
Hospital58973750 3750
51333307 3307
9%LOS F
09.30 -10.30Dir-II : Mallinge 
Hospital To 
Ashoka Piller2147 2147 1826 1826 LOS C
8Marigowda Road 
(Near -National 
Institute Of Mental 
Health & Neuro 
Sciences)Dir-I : Dairy Circle 
To Wilson Garden
75103845 3845
71053702 3702
7%LOS F
10.15 -11.15 Dir-II :Wilson 
Garden To Dairy 
Circle3665 3665 3404 3404 LOS F
9NH-44 Bengaluru -
Chennai Highway 
(Near -Madiwala 
footbridge)Dir-I : Adugodi To 
Electronic City
168727056 7056
148756186 6186
7%LOS F
09.30 -10.30
Dir-II : Electronic 
City To Adugodi9816 9816 8690 8690 LOS FLocation DirectionBoth 
Direction 
VehiclesPeak 
VehiclesSegregated 
Peak 
VehiclesBoth 
Direction 
PCUsPeak PCUsSegregated 
Peak PCUsPeak 
Hour %LOSPeak Time
542
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
542
Table 156 : Evening Peak hour Volume at Surveyed Locations
Location DirectionBoth 
Directio
n 
VehiclesPeak 
VehiclesSegregate
d Peak 
VehiclesBoth 
Direction 
PCUsPeak 
PCUsSegregate
d Peak 
PCUsPeak 
Hour %Peak Time LOS
1NH-44 Bellary 
Road (Near -
Sakar Nagar)Dir-I : Yelahanka To 
Hebbal (Towards 
Bengaluru)
19609102565507
1821494835201
7% 17:45 -18:45LOS F
Dir I - Service Lane 
(Towards Bengaluru)4749 4282 LOS F
Dir-II : Hebbal To 
Yelahanka (Towards 
Airport) 93538746
87318100 LOS F
Dir II - Service Lane 
(Towards Airport)607 632 LOS B
2NH-75 Malur -
Byranahalli Rd 
Outer Ring 
Road (Near -
Nagavara 
park)Dir-I : Bellary Road 
To Nagavara
1738199046337
1534186735549
7% 18:30 -19:30LOS F
Dir I - Service Lane 3569 3125 LOS F
Dir-II :Nagavara To 
Bellary Road 7477540966684824 LOS E
Dir II - Service Lane 2068 1844 LOS C
3NH-75 Malur -
Byranahalli Rd 
Outer Ring 
Road (Near -
Devinagar BEL 
Circle)Dir-I : Hebbal To 
Yashwantpur
92715140 5140
86734839 4839
6% 18:00 -19:00LOS E
Dir-II : Yashwantpur 
To Hebbal4131 4131 3833 3833 LOS C
4AH-47 Malur 
Road (Near -
Science 
Gallery)Dir-I : Mekhri circle 
To Airport
1581683585404
1455577154998
6% 17:45 -18:45LOS E
Dir I - Service Lane 2954 2717 LOS F
Dir-II : Airport To 
Mekhri circle 7458624068405769 LOS F
Dir II - Service Lane 1218 1072 LOS B
543
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
543
Table 157: Evening Peak hour Volume at Surveyed Locations
Location DirectionBoth 
Directio
n 
VehiclesPeak 
VehiclesSegregate
d Peak 
VehiclesBoth 
Direction 
PCUsPeak 
PCUsSegregate
d Peak 
PCUsPeak 
Hour %Peak Time LOS
5Guttahalli 
Main Road 
(Near -
Uniworth 
Plaza)Dir-I : Mahalakshmi 
Gudi Circle To 
Bengaluru Golf Club
114875341 5341
109645083 5083
6% 16:15 -17:15LOS E
Dir-II : Bengaluru 
Golf Club To 
Mahalakshmi Gudi 
Circle6146 6146 5882 5882 LOS F
6NR road 
(Near -Silver 
Jubilee Park)Dir-I : Kempegowda  
Tower To 
Chamrajpet115196087 6087
110225897 5897
6% 18:45 -19:45LOS F
Dir-II : Chamrajpet 
To Kempegowda 
Tower5432 5432 5125 5125 LOS E
7Siddapura 
Road (Near -
Maharaja 
Agrasena 
Bhavana)Dir-I : Ashoka Piller 
To Mallinge Hospital
48441971 1971
43361823 1823
7% 17:00 -18:00LOS C
Dir-II : Mallinge 
Hospital To Ashoka 
Piller2873 2873 2514 2514 LOS E
8Marigowda 
Road (Near -
National 
Institute Of 
Mental Health 
& Neuro 
Sciences)Dir-I : Dairy Circle 
To Wilson Garden
69943469 3469
68063358 3358
6% 17:00 -18:00LOS F
Dir-II :Wilson 
Garden To Dairy 
Circle3525 3525 3448 3448 LOS F
9NH-44 
Bengaluru -
Chennai 
Highway 
(Near -
Madiwala  
footbridge)Dir-I : Adugodi To 
Electronic City
154279198 9198
140488267 8267
6% 17:00 -18:00LOS F
Dir-II : Electronic 
City To Adugodi6229 6229 5781 5781 LOS F
544
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
544
The cordon -wise  traffic  composition  during  the peak  hour  for the cordons  is given  in Figure  57. Private  modes  (cars  and two-wheelers)  
occupy  the major  share,  at 83.4%, followed  by Auto  which  is 9%.
0.00% 20.00% 40.00% 60.00% 80.00% 100.00%123456789
% CompositionLocationCordon wise Peak Hour Traffic Composition
2-Wheeler Car Taxi Auto Bus LCV Truck Cycle Cycle-Rkishaw Other
Figure 460: Cordon wise Peak hour Traffic Composition
Turning  Movement  Counts  at Intersections
A total  of 7 critical  intersections  were  identified  where  the volume  of vehicles  in all turning  directions  were  noted . The analysis  of the 
urning  movement  volume  count  survey  at the intersections  is given  in sub-sections  below . Amongst  the identified  locations  above,  it was 
observed  that,  on an average,  the total  traffic  is more  than  1,50,000 vehicles  per day,  with  the highest  per day vehicular  volume  observed  
at Basaveshwara  circle,  where  2,38,685 vehicles  had accumulated,  followed  by Shoolay  circle,  Bangalore  Cantt  Jn, Cn Rao Underpass  Jn 
with  1,87,462, 1,70,379, 1,72,303 vehicles,  respectively . The lowest  per day traffic  volume  was observed  at Lalbagh  Chowk  with  1,19,980 
vehicles  in one day. Table  shows  the total  volumes  recorded  at the intersections  and Figure   shows  the Temporal  distribution  of traffic  at 
the Intersections .
545
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
545
Table 158 : Traffic Volume at Intersections
Locat
ionName of
JunctionDaily 
VehiclesDaily PCUMorning Evening
Direction of 
maximum FlowPeak HourPeak Hour 
VehiclesPeak Hour 
PCUsPeak HourPeak Hour 
VehiclesPeak Hour 
PCUs
1CN Rao underpass 
Junction172303 158783 10.45 -11.45 13658 12244 18:45 -19:45 12599 11237 Mekhri circle
2Banglore  Cantt 
Junction170379 155088 09.30 -10.30 12797 11267 18:45 -19:45 12589 11161 Vasant Nagar
3Basaveshwara 
circle238685 218271 09.00 -10.00 15026 13347 18:00 -19:00 16817 15053 Vasanth Nagar
4 KR Circle 163363 148977 10.15 -11.15 13119 11432 16:00 -17:00 10901 9686Anand Rao 
Junction
5Cubbon Park UB 
City signal155057 142475 09.30 -10.30 9681 8351 19:15 -20:15 10617 9453Kempegowda 
Tower
6 Shoolay Circle 187462 175475 09.30 -10.30 12574 11160 18:45 -19:45 11619 10335 Malitry Area
7 Lalbagh Chowk 119980 108159 10.45 -11.45 7451 6581 16:30 -17:30 7925 7034South End 
Circle
546
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
546
0200040006000800010000120001400016000
08.00 -09.00
09.00 -10.00
10.00 -11.00
11.00 -12.00
12:00 -13:00
13:00 -14:00
14:00 -15:00
15:00 -16:00
16:00 -17:00
17:00 -18:00
18:00 -19:00
19:00 -20:00PCUS
TIMETemporal Distribution of Traffic at Intersections
1 2 3 4 5 6 7Figure   shows  the turning  moment  
count  survey  locations  spatially  with  
the daily  volume  at each  intersection . 
An average  traffic  of 1,58,000 PCU  are 
observed  on the intersections  with  the 
highest  traffic  at Basaveshwara  circle  
consisting  of 2,18,271 PCUs .
Figure  461: Temporal Distribution of traffic at Intersections
547
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
547
Speed  and Delay
Speed  and Delay  study  is done  along  the road  connecting  from  Hebbal  to Silk 
Board  Junction  (Upto  Ring  Road) . As Shown  in Figure  60 the route  is 
congested  at most  of the locations,  especially  near  the core area
Travel  Behaviour
1.Origin -Destination  Survey  at Cordon  Points
Roadside  interviews  were  carried  out on a sample  
basis  to understand  the characteristics  of the ongoing  
trips . They  captured  details  like purpose,  modes,  
origin -destination,  etc.
• To derive  the passenger  
and freight  travel  
pattern  by road
•These surveys will be
aimed atanalysing the
movement between the
study area and external
zones .OBJECTIVE
• Interviews  will be 
carried  out on a sample  
basis  by stopping  the 
vehiclesMETHOD
• Information's  like origin  
and destination  of trip, 
occupancy,  trip purpose  
and in the case of goods  
vehicles  their  type  and 
tonnage . OUTPUT
Figure 462: Speed and Delay 548
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
548
Average  Trip  lengths
Based  on analysis  of OD data  the average  trip lengths  (ATL)  for 
each  mode  is calculated  as shown  in Table  159. For internal -to-
internal  movement  the ATL  of car is 8 km followed  by two-wheeler  
having  7.6 km ATL  and 6.6 km for Auto .
Table 159: Averagse  Trip Lengths (km)
I-I I-E E-E E-I
2-Wheeler 7.6 15.8 19 14.7
CAR 8.0 16.2 24.5 18.4
AUTO 6.6 13.5 16.2 12.7
LCV 7.1 18.3 24 20
HCV 5.8 13.6 14.1 18
Frequency  Distribution
Trip Length  Frequency  Distribution  for car for Internal  to Internal,  
Internal  to External,  External  to External  and External  to Internal  is 
shown  below .
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%
0246810121416182022242628303234Frequency (%)
Trip Length (km)TLFD - Car
I-I
I-E
E-E
E-I
Figure 463 : Trip Length Frequency Distribution Curve for CarTrip  Purpose
The purpose  wise  distribution  of trips  is shown  in Figure  62. The work  
trips  has highest  share  of 69% followed  by Business  trips  16% out of 
the total  trips .
Work
69%Business
16%Education
3%Social
3%Shopping
3%Recreation
2%Hospital
1%Other
3%
Work
 Business
 Education
 Social
Shopping
 Recreation
 Hospital
 Other
Figure 464: Purpose wise Distribution of Trips during peak hour
Base Year Travel Demand Model
Introduction
The base  year  model  is developed  for the year  2024  to understand  and 
validate  the travel  patterns . A validated  base  year  model  acts as a check  
of the network  credibility  and is used  to further  evaluate  future  
scenarios . For the present  assignment  base  model,  PTV  VISUM  2024  is 
used . The model  is developed  for private  transport  models  only . The 
bus PCU’s  on the road  network  are taken  as preload  based  on the count  
data .
PTV  Visum  2024  is a comprehensive,  flexible  software  system  for 
strategic  traffic  and transport  planning . Around  the globe,  549
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
Estimated  Trips
Table  160 shows  the total  no. of estimated  trips  produced  by each  mode  for the study  area. The maximum  no. of trips  produced  is observed  
for Two -wheeler  i.e., 1,20,288 trips  followed  by Car i.e., 59,322 and 25,603 by Autorickshaw  among  passenger  vehicle  in the modelled  peak  
hour . A total  of 3,854 trips  are produced  by freight  vehicles  in the modelled  peak  hour .
Table 160: Total no. of Trips (Mode -wise)Mode No. of Trips
Car 59,322
Two -Wheeler 1,20,288
Autorickshaw 25,603
Light  Commercial  Vehicle 3,640
Heavy  Commercial  Vehicle 214
Summary
After running multiple iteration of base year assignment, the base year model has been calibrated and the model is fit for th e calculation of 
future travel demand of horizon year.
Horizon Year Model 
Planning  Period
The demand  to be calculated  for the future  is to be estimated  for 5 years,  15 years  and 25 years  from  the base  year  i.e., 2024 . For future  growth  
estimation,  three  scenarios  are developed  to estimate  the number  of trips  diverted  on the North -South  corridor  for Horizon  Year . The model  
runs  are done  for the years  of 2031 , 2041  and 2051 , and other  results  are extracted  from  the result  of these  2 years .
Planning  Parameters
Population  data  is referred  from  CMP  2020  and the zone  wise  population  distribution  has been  carried  out for base  year  and zonal  
distribution  of population  has been  done  for horizon  year  considering  similar  distribution .
The horizon  year  population  is given  bellow  in Table  .
Year Population
2021 1,28,62,825
2024 1,32,62,233
2031 1,68,56,904
2041 1,98,67,161Table 161 : BBMP Population Projections
550
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
550
Transport Modeling Consultant’s Approach
Consultant’s  focused  in using  the already  available  Transport  model  that was prepared  for the Comprehensive  Mobility  Plan  2020  by 
updating  the present  traffic  data  and network  and coding  the same  into the model  to make  the current  situation  as realistic  as possible . The 
proposed  road  network  of Elevated  Corridors  and the Tunnel  alignments  were  then  coded  into the network  to run different  scenarios  and 
their  evaluation  with  outputs  of travel  demand  modeling . The existing  metro  phase -I and Phase -II have  been  coded  for running  the base  year  
BAU  scenario . All other  proposed  metro  lines  and sub urban  railway  lines  have  been  coded  for scenarios  2041  and 2051 .
Business as Usual (BAU)
The CMP  considers  Business  as Usual  Scenario  (BAU)  for 2031  wherein  the present  base  year  trends  are assumed  to continue  for the horizon  
years  with  minimum  changes  to occur  in the future . This  scenario  assesses  the transport  system  with  base  year  trends  and assumes  no 
radical  policy  interventions  for sustainable  development  and emission  mitigations  to identify  the effects  on travel  infrastructure,  mode  share  
and PT systems  in the city. Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
Scenario  Building
Following  three  scenarios  were  considered  for this  feasibility  study .
Scenario  1 (S1)
This  scenario  considers  the mode  share  estimates  as per the BAU  scenario  of CMP . 
Scenario  2 (S2)
This  is considered  as an intermediate  scenario . The projections  are based  on the intermediate  growth  rates  estimated  for each  Zones  and 
committed  projects .
Scenario  3 (S3)
This  scenario  considers  all future  developments  inclusive  of all Metro  Lines,  Proposed  elevated  corridors,  Sub Urban  rails  and Proposed  
Tunnels  ( North - South  & East-West  Tunnels) .
The modal  share  for all scenarios  is shown  below  in Table  68 which  is referred  from  CMP  2020 . 
The scenario  1 and 3 are directly  taken  from  CMP  2020  where  S1 shows  a high  share  of cars whereas  S3 shows  a low share  of cars and 
high  share  of public  transport . Scenario  2 is considered  as an intermediate  scenario  whose  modal  share  falls in between  these  two 
scenarios  1 and 3.
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
a) Metro - The phase  2 of Metro  will see the network  expand  by a distance  of
72.095 km. This  stretch  of the project  will see the development  of 61 metro  stations . Out of  these  proposed  61 stations,  12 stations  are to be 
built  underground . The complete  stretch  of the 72.095 km long  network  will be divided  into an underground  stretch  of 13.79km, an 
elevated  stretch  of 57.825 km, and 0.48 km will be at grade .
Peripheral  ring road :
(b). The BDA  proposes  that the peripheral  ring road  be built  (78 kilometers)  around  Bengaluru . This  stretch  connects  Tumkur  Road  (NH 4) 
and Hosur  Road  (NH 7) on the northern  side acting  complementary  to existing  Nice  Road  (which  is on southern  side of city) .
(c). Elevated  Corridors : There  is a need  for augmenting  the capacity  of arterial  roads  in the CBD  areas,  as well as beyond  the ORR . While  
at-grade  augmentation  is the default  option  and should  be pursued  for peripheral  areas,  limitations  of land  acquisition  in the CBD  require  
consideration  of road  capacity  augmentation  through  elevated  roads . Hence,  the Government  of Karnataka  is planning  on further  
augmentation  of urban  road  capacity  through  elevated  corridors,  with  particular  attention  to the equitable  allocation  of road  space,  by 
prioritizing  movements  of public  transport  vehicles,  pedestrians  and bicyclists . A total  of 100 kms of elevated  corridors  are proposed  
within  the city limits  along  with  around  50kms of tunnel  is proposed  and these  have  been  coded  into the transport  model  along  with  the 
current  traffic  data  and other  transportation  data  as required  as an input  into the transport  model  to develop  different  scenarios .
(d) Augmentation  of BMTC  buses  to double  the existing  fleet : BMTC’s  bus augmentation  plan  for the future  years  to meet  the ever  
increasing  demand .Business  as Usual   Scenario  Do Minimum
In “ Do Minimum”  Business  as Usual  (BAU -DM)  scenario,  the existing  road  network  with  committed  development  projects  are considered . The 
list of committed  projects  proposed  by various  departments  includes  the following :
The major  transport  proposals  committed  include :
552
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
Figure  465 .V/ C Ratio on  al l the Links ( BMA  Area)  – 2 0 3 1The Updated data and travel characteristics updated to the year 2024 have been used to develop the business as usual scenario  as a  
beginning. The findings of model out put of this scenario is indicated as below;
553
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
Network considered for running the model for different scenarios
1. All Metro Corridor
2. All proposed elevated corridors
3. All proposed tunnels
Figure .466 .Existing Bangalore Network coded with all the proposals in CUBE Model
554
North -South tunnel
East-west tunnelTunnel Network coded for running different scenariosComprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
Figure .467. Proposed North -South Tunnel from Hebbal 
to Silk Board coded in the network
Figure .468 .Proposed East - West Tunnel from 
K.R.Puram  to Nayandahalli coded in the network
555
Travel Demand Forecast Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanConstruction of Split flyover at MEI junction on Tumakuru road
Corridor 
No.CorridorTotal PCU's 
on Existing 
peak hour 
traffic on 
both the 
directionsV/c LoSTotal PCU's On 
Elevated corridor 
both directional 
traffic V/c LoSTotal PCU's At grade 
traffic after the 
Elevated Corridor is 
developedV/c LoS
Scenario 2031
1.B
Split flyover at MEI junction 13449 1.49 E 5742 0.64 C 7706 0.49 B
Scenario 2041
1.B Split flyover at MEI junction 15075 1.67 F 5121 0.57 C 9953 0.70 C
Scenario 2051
1.B Split flyover at MEI junction 16700 1.86 F 4500 0.50 C 12200 0.91 CThe model  output  indicates  that the Level  of service  
have  changed  from  E from  the base  year  2031  to the 
Level  of service  C in the horizon  year,  justifying  the 
proposed  infrastructure  improvements .
V/c-1.49
LOS -EV/c- 0.91
LOS -C
Table 162 : V/c & LoS Projections as per Travel demand for the  Underpass at 100 feet Goraguntaepalya  junction on Tumakuru road
556
Existing Speed
25 KmphAnticipated Speeds
30 Kmph
Corridor 
No.1CorridorTotal PCU's 
on Existing 
peak hour 
traffic on 
both the 
directionsV/C Ratio LoSTotal PCU's 
On 
Elevated 
corridor 
both 
directional 
traffic V/c LoSTotal PCU's 
At grade 
traffic after 
the 
Elevated 
Corridor is 
developedV/C Ratio LoS
Scenario 2031
1.CKR puram -Old madaras  road -
Ulsoor  lake -St.John  Chruch  road -
Jaymahal  road -Mekhri  circle -IISC - 
Mathikere  Cross15498 1.72 F 6300 0.7 C 4600 0.66 C
Scenario  2041
1.CKR puram -Old madaras  road -
Ulsoor  lake -St.John  Chruch  road -
Jaymahal  road -Mekhri  circle -IISC - 
Mathikere  Cross16261.535 1.807 F 9700 1.078 D 4262.825 0.546 C
Scenario  2051
1.cKR puram -Old madaras  road -
Ulsoor  lake -St.John  Chruch  road -
Jaymahal  road -Mekhri  circle -IISC - 
Mathikere  Cross17025.35 1.89 F 13100 1.46 E 3925.35 0.44 BKR puram -Old madaras  road -Ulsoor lake -St.John  Chruch  road -Jaymahal  road -Mekhri  circle -IISC - Mathikere  Cross
The model  output  indicates  that the Level  of 
service  have  changed  from  F from  the base  year  
2031  to the Level  of service  B in the horizon  year,  
justifying  the proposed  infrastructure  
improvements .
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Travel Demand Forecast
V/c-1.72
LOS -FV/c- 0.44
LOS -B
Table 163 : V/c & LoS Projections as per Travel demand forecast 
from K.R.Puram  to Mathikere
557Existing Speed
Below 15 KmphAnticipated Speeds
40 Kmph
Travel Demand Forecast Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanIntegrated  Elevation  from  Hudson  Circle  to Minerva  Circle  (Minerva  Circle,  Bharat -Talks,  Shivaji  Talkies,  Town  Hall,  
LIC,  Halasuru  Police  Station,  Hudson  Circle,  Cubbon  Park)
The model  output  indicates  that the Level  of service  
have  changed  from  F from  the base  year  2031  to the 
Level  of service  D in the horizon  year,  justifying  the 
proposed  infrastructure  improvements .
Corridor No. CorridorTotal PCU's on 
Existing peak hour 
traffic on both the 
directionsV/C Ratio LoSTotal PCU's On 
Elevated corridor 
both directional 
traffic V/c LoSTotal PCU's At grade 
traffic after the Elevated 
Corridor is developedV/C 
RatioLoS
Scenario 2031
3Integrated Elevation from Hudson Circle 
to Minarva  Circle ( Minavara  Circle, 
Bharat -Talks, Shivaji Talkies, Town Hall, 
LIC, Halasuru  Police Station, Hudson 
Circle, Cubbon  Park) 17323 1.92 F 8413 0.93 C 8910 0.80 C
Scenario 2041
3Integrated Elevation from Hudson Circle 
to Minarva  Circle ( Minavara  Circle, 
Bharat -Talks, Shivaji Talkies, Town Hall, 
LIC, Halasuru  Police Station, Hudson 
Circle, Cubbon  Park) 19439 2.16 F 10556 1.17 D 8883 0.93 C
Scenario 2051
3Integrated Elevation from Hudson Circle 
to Minarva  Circle ( Minavara  Circle, 
Bharat -Talks, Shivaji Talkies, Town Hall, 
LIC, Halasuru  Police Station, Hudson 
Circle, Cubbon  Park) 21555 2.39 F 12699 1.41 E 8856 1.07 DV/c-1.92
LOS -FV/c- 1.07
LOS -D
Table 164 : V/c & LoS Projections as per Travel demand from Minerva 
to Hudson Circle
558Existing Speed
Below 15 Kmph Anticipated Speeds
25 Kmph
Travel Demand Forecast Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanElevated Corridor from Hosur Road from Shoolay circle – Vellara junction -Anepalya  Junction -Adugodi  Junction -Forum 
junction -St.John  Chruch  junction -Madiwala junction -Silk board Junction
Corridor 
No.CorridorTotal PCU's 
on Existing 
peak hour 
traffic on 
both the 
directionsV/c LoSTotal PCU's On 
Elevated corridor 
both directional 
traffic V/c LoSTotal PCU's At grade 
traffic after the 
Elevated Corridor is 
developedV/c LoS
Scenario 2031
7.BHosur Road from Anepalya Junction -
Adugodi Junction -Forum junction -
St.John Chruch junction -Madiwala 
junction -Silk board Junction 10669 1.78 F 5800 0.64 C 4869 0.61 C
Scenario 2041
7.BHosur Road from Anepalya Junction -
Adugodi Junction -Forum junction -
St.John Chruch junction -Madiwala 
junction -Silk board Junction 11750 1.60 E 7055 0.78 C 4695 0.57 C
Scenario 2051
7.BHosur Road from Anepalya Junction -
Adugodi Junction -Forum junction -
St.John Chruch junction -Madiwala 
junction -Silk board Junction 12831 1.43 E 8310 0.92 C 4521 0.52 CThe model  output  indicates  that the Level  of service  have  
changed  from  F from  the base  year  2031  to the Level  of 
service  C in the horizon  year,  justifying  the proposed  
infrastructure  improvements .
V/c-1.78
LOS -FV/c- 0.52
LOS -C
Table 165 : V/c & LoS Projections as per Travel demand from 
Anaepalya  junction to Silk Board
559Existing Speed
Below 15 KmphAnticipated Speeds
30 Kmph
Travel Demand Forecast Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanElevated  corridor  from  Sirsi  circle  to Nayandahalli
The model  output  indicates  that the Level  of service  
have  changed  from  F from  the base  year  2031  to the 
Level  of service  C in the horizon  year,  justifying  the 
proposed  infrastructure  improvements .
V/c-1.62
LOS -FV/c- 0.63
LOS -C
Corridor 
No.CorridorTotal 
PCU's on 
Existing 
peak hour 
traffic on 
both the 
directionsV/C Ratio LoSTotal PCU's 
On Elevated 
corridor both 
directional 
traffic V/c LoSTotal PCU's At 
grade traffic after 
the Elevated 
Corridor is 
developedV/C Ratio LoS
Scenario 2031
8Integrated Elevated flyover fromSirsi 
Circle to Nayandahalli 9722 1.62 F 6599 0.73 C 3123 0.52 C
Scenario 2041
8Integrated Elevated flyover fromSirsi 
Circle to Nayandahalli 10217 1.70 F 7321 0.81 C 3633 0.61 C
Scenario 2051
8Integrated Elevated flyover fromSirsi 
Circle to Nayandahalli 11213 1.87 F 7734 0.86 C 3788 0.63 CTable 166 : V/c & LoS Projections as per Travel demand from Sirsi  circle to Nayandahalli
560Existing Speed
Below 15 KmphAnticipated Speeds
30 Kmph
Travel Demand Forecast Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanProposed  Elevated Corridor from Old Madras Road from  Swami Vivekananda Metro Station to Silk Board Junction 
on Hosur road  via Indiranagar -Domlur - Madiwala.
The model  output  indicates  that the Level  of service  
have  changed  from  F from  the base  year  2031  to the 
Level  of service  C in the horizon  year,  justifying  the 
proposed  infrastructure  improvements .
V/c-1.59
LOS -FV/c- 0.80
LOS -C
Corridor No. CorridorTotal PCU's 
on Existing 
peak hour 
traffic on 
both the 
directionsV/c LoSTotal PCU's On 
Elevated corridor 
both directional 
traffic V/c LoSTotal PCU's At grade 
traffic after the 
Elevated Corridor is 
developedV/c LoS
Scenario 2031
10Old Madras Road,Vivekananda Metro 
Station to Silk Board Junction via 
Indiranagar -Domlur - Madiwala 14318 1.59 F 7250 0.81 C 7067 0.86 C
Scenario 2041
10Old Madras Road,Vivekananda Metro 
Station to Silk Board Junction via 
Indiranagar -Domlur - Madiwala 15765 1.75 F 8036 0.89 C 7729 0.83 C
Scenario 2051
10Old Madras Road,Vivekananda Metro 
Station to Silk Board Junction via 
Indiranagar -Domlur - Madiwala 17213 1.91 F 8821 0.98 C 8391 0.80 CTable 167 : V/c & LoS Projections as per Travel demand from 
Old Madras road to Hosur road Madiwala
561Existing Speed
Below 15 KmphAnticipated Speeds
30 Kmph
Travel Demand Forecast Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanIntegrated Elevated flyover from Nagawara junction -Ramakrishna Hedgede  Nagar Junction -Sampigehalli -
Tirumenahalli -Bellahalli  junction -Bagalur main road.
The model  output  indicates  that the Level  of 
service  have  changed  from  E from  the base  
year  2031  to the Level  of service  E in the 
horizon  year,  justifying  the proposed  
infrastructure  improvements .
V/c-1.38
LOS -EV/c- 1.25
LOS -E
Corridor No. CorridorTotal PCU's 
on Existing 
peak hour 
traffic on 
both the 
directionsV/c LoSTotal PCU's On 
Elevated corridor 
both directional 
traffic V/c LoSTotal PCU's At grade 
traffic after the 
Elevated Corridor is 
developedV/c LoS
Scenario 2031
11Integrated  Elevated  flyover  from  Nagawara  
junction -Ramakrishna  HedgedeNagar  Junction -
Sampigehalli -Tirumenahalli -Bellahalli  junction -
Bagalur  main  road 8296 1.38 E 3230 0.36 B 5066 1.13 D
Scenario  2041
11Integrated  Elevated  flyover  from  Nagawara  
junction -Ramakrishna  HedgedeNagar  Junction -
Sampigehalli -Tirumenahalli -Bellahalli  junction -
Bagalur  main  road 9371 1.27 D 4227 0.47 B 5144 1.19 D
Scenario  2051
11Integrated  Elevated  flyover  from  Nagawara  
junction -Ramakrishna  HedgedeNagar  Junction -
Sampigehalli -Tirumenahalli -Bellahalli  junction -
Bagalur  main  road 10446 1.16 D 5224 0.58 C 5222 1.25 ETable 168 : V/c & LoS Projections as per Travel 
demand from Nagawara  to Baglur
562Existing Speed
25KmphAnticipated Speeds
25 Kmph
Travel Demand Forecast Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
Corridor 
No.CorridorTotal PCU's 
on Existing 
peak hour 
traffic on 
both the 
directionsV/c LoSTotal PCU's On 
Elevated corridor 
both directional 
traffic V/c LoSTotal PCU's At grade 
traffic after the 
Elevated Corridor is 
developedV/c LoS
Scenario 2031
12.BElevated Corridor from Marenahalli 
main road connecting Kanakapura main 
road -Thalghattapura Nice road 9469 1.58 F 4128 0.46 B 5341 0.85 C
Scenario 2041
12.BElevated Corridor from Marenahalli 
main road connecting Kanakapura main 
road -Thalghattapura Nice road 11022 1.49 E 4622 0.51 C 6401 1.17 D
Scenario 2051
12.BElevated Corridor from Marenahalli 
main road connecting Kanakapura main 
road -Thalghattapura Nice road 12576 1.40 E 5115 0.57 C 7460 1.50 EElevated Corridor from Marenahalli main road connecting Kanakapura main road -Thalghattapura  Nice road.
The model  output  indicates  that the Level  of 
service  have  changed  from  F from  the base  
year  2031  to the Level  of service  E in the 
horizon  year,  justifying  the proposed  
infrastructure  improvements .
V/c-1.58
LOS -FV/c- 1.50
LOS -E
Table 169 : V/c & LoS Projections as per Travel demand 
from Marenahalli  to Thalghattapura
563Existing Speed
Below 15KmphAnticipated Speeds
25 Kmph
Travel Demand Forecast Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanProposed  Additional  link  road  to KIA,  Elevated  Corridor   from  Outer  Ring Road – Hennur  main  road  junction  to 
Bagalur  Junction .
Corrido
r No.CorridorTotal 
PCU's 
on 
Existing 
peak 
hour 
traffic 
on both 
the 
directio
nsV/C RatioLo
STotal PCU's 
On 
Elevated 
corridor 
both 
directional 
traffic V/cLo
STotal PCU's At 
grade traffic 
after the 
Elevated 
Corridor is 
developedV/C 
RatioLoS
Scenario 2031
14Integrated Elevated flyover 
from Hennur to Baglur 11345 1.89 F 7894 0.88 C 3451 0.58 C
Scenario 2041
14Integrated Elevated flyover 
from Hennur to Baglur 13387 2.231 F 8433 0.94 B 3421 0.57 C
Scenario 2051
14Integrated Elevated flyover 
from Hennur to Baglur 14231 2.37 F 9356 1.04 C 3877 0.65 CThe model  output  indicates  that the Level  of service  have  changed  from  E from  the base  year  2031  to 
the Level  of service  C in the horizon  year,  justifying  the proposed  infrastructure  improvements .
V/c-1.89
LOS -FV/c- 0.65
LOS -C
Table 170: V/c & LoS Projections as per Travel demand from Hennur  to Baglur
564Existing Speed
Below 15kmhpAnticipated Speeds
30kmhp
Travel Demand Forecast Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanProposed  Double  Decker  Elevated  corridor  with  Metro  line  from  Hosahalli  to Kadabagere  cross  along  Magadi  road  crossing  
ORR  and NICE  corridor .
The model  output  indicates  that the Level  of 
service  have  changed  from  F from  the base  year  
2031  to the Level  of service  B in the horizon  year,  
justifying  the proposed  infrastructure  
improvements .
V/c-2.60
LOS -FV/c- 0.65
LOS -B
Table 171 : V/c & LoS Projections as per Travel demand from Hosahalli to Kadabagere  cross
Corrid
or No.CorridorTotal PCU's on 
Existing peak 
hour traffic on 
both the 
directionsV/C Ratio LoSTotal PCU's 
On Elevated 
corridor both 
directional 
traffic V/c LoSTotal PCU's 
At grade 
traffic after 
the 
Elevated 
Corridor is 
developedV/C 
RatioLoS
Scenario 2031
2Double Decker from Hosahalli to 
Kadabagere cross117032.60 F 5852 0.65 B 5852 0.65 B
Scenario 2041
2Double Decker from Hosahalli to 
Kadabagere cross154253.43 F 7713 0.86 B 7713 0.86 B
Scenario 2051
2Double Decker from Hosahalli to 
Kadabagere cross160463.57 F 8023 0.89 B 8023 0.89 BExisting Speed
Below 15kmhpAnticipated Speeds
40Kmph
Travel Demand Forecast Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan
Corridor No. CorridorTotal PCU's on Existing 
peak hour traffic on both 
the directionsV/C Ratio LoSTotal PCU's 
On Elevated 
corridor 
both 
directional 
traffic V/c LoSTotal PCU's 
At grade 
traffic after 
the Elevated 
Corridor is 
developedV/C Ratio LoS
Scenario 2031
2North - South Tunnel ( 
from Hebbal to Silk board)224072.49 F 7394 0.82 C 15013 1.67 F
Scenario 2041
2North - South Tunnel ( 
from Hebbal to Silk board)179652.00 F 10779 1.20 D 7186 0.80 C
Scenario 2051
2North - South Tunnel ( 
from Hebbal to Silk board)115671.29 F 6940 0.77 C 3788 0.63 C
North -South  Tunnel  Corridor  from  Hebbal  to Silk  Board
The model  output  indicates  that the Level  of 
service  have  changed  from  F from  the base  year  
2031  to the Level  of service  C in the horizon  year,  
justifying  the proposed  infrastructure  
improvements .
V/c-2.49
LOS -FV/c- 0.63
LOS -C
Table 172 : V/c & LoS Projections as per Travel demand 
from Tunnel (NORTH_SOUTH) from Hebbal 
to Silk Board
566Existing Speed
Below 15kmhpAnticipated Speeds
30Kmph
Travel Demand Forecast Comprehensive Traffic Management PlanEast - West  Tunnel  Corridor  from  K.R.Puram  to Nayandahalli
The model  output  indicates  that the Level  of 
service  have  changed  from  E from  the base  year  
2031  to the Level  of service  C in the horizon  year,  
justifying  the proposed  infrastructure  
improvements .
V/c-2.49
LOS -FV/c- 0.63
LOS -C
Corridor No. CorridorTotal PCU's on 
Existing peak hour 
traffic on both the 
directionsV/C Ratio LoSTotal 
PCU's On 
Elevated 
corridor 
both 
direction
al traffic V/c LoSTotal 
PCU's At 
grade 
traffic 
after the 
Elevated 
Corridor 
is 
develope
dV/C Ratio LoS
Scenario 2031
2East-West Tunnel  ( 
from K.R.Puram to 
Nayandahalli)16223
1.80 F 8112 0.90 C 8112 0.90 C
Scenario 2041
2East-West Tunnel  ( 
from K.R.Puram to 
Nayandahalli)17432
1.94 F 10459 1.16 D 6973 0.77 C
Scenario 2051
2East-West Tunnel  ( 
from K.R.Puram to 
Nayandahalli)10134
1.13 F 6080 0.68 C 3788 0.63 CTable 172 : V/c & LoS Projections as per Travel demand from Tunnel (EAST_WEST) from K.R.Puram  to Nayandahalli
567Existing Speed
Below 15kmhpAnticipated Speeds
30Kmph
08 . 
Environmental 
Impact 
Assessment
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact Assessment
INTRODUCTION
This  report  has been  prepared  as per the EIA 
Notification,  2006  & its amendments  and the guiding  
document  EIA Guidance  Manual  for Highway  project .
The Objectives  of the EIA study  are as follows :
i. To describe  the proposed  project  and associated  
works  together  with  the requirements  for carrying  
out the proposed  development .
ii. To identify  and describe  the elements  of the 
community  and environment  likely  to be affected  
by the proposed  development
iii. To identify  and quantify  emission  sources  and 
determine  the significance  of impacts  on sensitive  
receptors .
iv. To identify,  predict  and evaluate  environmental  
and social  impacts  during  the construction  and 
usage  of the project  in relation  to the sensitive  
receptors .
v. To develop  an Environmental  Management  Plan  
that identifies  the negative  impacts  and develops  
mitigation  measures  so as to minimize  pollution,  
environmental  disturbance  and nuisance  during  
the construction  and operations  of the 
development .Bangalore’s  population  has grown  dramatically  in the last decade,  and 
the city now  ranks  among  the top metropolitan  areas  in the country,  
both  in terms  of population  and in terms  of the economic  activity . The 
city has undergone  a rapid  transformation  into one of the most  
storied  economic  centres  of the world  and attracted  millions  of job-
seeking  migrants .
Increasing  traffic  volumes  and its associated  adverse  impacts  on 
congestion  and air quality  is a key problem  in Bangalore  and elsewhere  
in India  and this situation  is likely  to deteriorate  further . Addressing  
the issue  of travel  demand  solely  through  largescale  road  construction  
is neither  a viable  nor a sustainable  option  as the impact  on our local  
communities  would  be huge  in terms  of the environment,  land  take,  
property  demolition  and isolation . The need,  therefore  to find other  
solutions  that can meet  peoples’  desire  to travel,  by creating  a Traffic  
Management  Study  plan  that includes  both  short -term  and long -term,  
the ones  that can begin  to grapple  with  the complex  demands  of traffic  
and transport  management .
569
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact AssessmentTable  .173 The corresponding  is the list of  proposed   Elevated  corridors,  underpasses  and Tunnels   in Bangalore  
570Sl. No Corridor Length  kms
1Split Flyover at MEI Junction 0.5
2Yeshwanthpura  ( Mathikere  cross) -IISC -Mekri  circle -
Jayamahal -St John Church road -Ulsoor lake -Old Madras 
Road -KR Puram.27
3Integrated Elevation from Hudson Circle to Minarva  Circle 
(Minavara  Circle, Bharat -Talks, Shivaji Talkies, Town Hall, 
LIC, Halasuru  Police Station, Hudson Circle, Cubbon  Park)2.7
4Proposed flyover / Underpass at Konankuntae Cross for 
Through Traffic from Kanakapura to Banashankari0.9
5Proposed  Flyover  at Adayar  Ananda  Bhavan,  
Raghuvanahalli , Kanakapura  Road0.8
6Proposed  Continuation  of Ananda  Rao Circle  flyover  up to 
K.R. Circle  towards  Nrupatunga  road1.7
7Extension of Existing Madiwala  underpass till Traffic police 
station junction0.5
8Elevated Corridor from Hosur Road from Shoolay  circle – 
Vellara  junction -Anepalya  Junction -Adugodi  Junction -
Forum junction -St.John  Chruch  junction -Madiwala  junction -
Silk board Junction7.4
9Proposed Elevated corridor from Sirsi  Circle to 
Nayandahalli on Mysuru road3.5
10Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  from  Old Madras  Road  from   
Swami  Vivekananda  Metro  Station  to Silk Board  Junction  on 
Hosur  road   via Indiranagar -Domlur - Madiwala10
11Proposed Elevated Corridor from Nagawara  junction -
Ramakrishna HedgedeNagar  Junction -Sampigehalli -
Tirumenahalli -Bellahalli  junction -Bagalur  main road15
12Proposed Elevated Corridor from Maraenahalli main road  
from Ragi Gudda to 7th main junction thereby connecting 
Kanakapura main road till Thalghattapura  Nice road via 
Pipe Line road.10.5
13Proposed  Additional  link road  to KIA,  Elevated  Corridor   
from  Outer  Ring Road – Hennur  main  road  junction  to 
Bagalur  Junction
 15Sl. 
No`CorridorLength  
Kms
14Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  along  Tannery  road  from  Madava  
Mudiliyar  road  to Nagawara  Junction .5.5
15Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  from  Yelahanka  New  town  to 
Kempegowda  International  Airport  Road4
16Proposed   Elevated  corridor  from  West  of Chord  Road  to 
Outer  Ring  road  via Pipe  Line  road  (Nandini  Layout) .4.5
DD1Proposed Double Decker Elevated corridor with Metro line  
from Hosahalli to Kadabagere  cross along Magadi road 
crossing ORR and NICE corridor.13
DD2Proposed Double -Decker Corridor in collaboration with Indian 
Railways, connecting the BEL Road intersection to the rear side 
of Yeshwanthpur Railway Station via Mohan Kumar Road.2.2
T1Proposed  North  – South  Tunnel  Corridor  from  Hebbal  to Silk 
Board18
T2Proposed  East- West  Tunnel  Corridor  from  K. R. Puram  (I.T.I  
Colony)  to Nayandahalli  NICE  intersection28
Total Length 170.7
Total Length of Tunnels 46
Total length of Elevated corridors/ Double Deckers/ 
Underpasses 124.7
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact AssessmentPOLICY AND FRAMEWORK:
Review  of environmental  regulations  indicates  that the project  requires  Prior  Environmental  Clearance  from  MoEFCC . However,  
permission  for cutting  the trees  within  the proposed  right  of way  of the project  road  will be required  from  the Forest  Department . 
In addition  to the above,  the concessionaire  would  require  the following  NOCs  & licenses  from  the authorities  during  
construction :
1. NOC  and Consents  under  Air Act, Water  Act, EP Acts  & Noise  Rules  from  Karnataka  SPCB  for establishing  and operation .
2. NOC  under  Hazardous  Waste  (Management,  Handling  and Transboundary  Movement)  Rules,  20019  from  SPCB .
3. PUC  certificate  for use of vehicles  for construction  from  Department  of Transport .
4. Quarry  lease  deeds  and license  and Explosive  license  from  State  Dept . of Geology  and Mines  & Chief  controller  of explosives .
5. NOC  for water  extraction  for construction  and allied  works  from  Ground  Water  Authority  Apart  from  the above  clearances,  the 
Concessionaire  also has to comply  with  the following :
a. Clearance  for location  and layout  of Worker’s  Camp,  Equipment  yard  and Storage  yard .
b. Clearance  for Traffic  Management  Plan  for each  section  of the route  after  it has been  handed  over  for construction .
c. An Emergency  Action  Plan  should  be prepared  by the Contractor  and approved  by the Engineer  for accidents  responding  to 
involving  fuel & lubricants  before  the construction  starts .
d. Submit  a Quarry  Management  Plan  to the Engineer  along  with  the Quarry  lease  deeds .
571
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact Assessment
Environment
-al 
ComponentsPre -
Construction
PhaseConstruction PhaseOperati
on 
Phase
Land 
acquisitionRemoval of 
structuresRemoval of 
trees and 
VegetationEarth works 
including 
quarryingLaying of 
PavementVehicle & 
Machine 
Operation & 
maintenanceAsphalt & 
CrusherSanitation 
& waste 
(labour 
campus)Vehicle 
operatio
n
LandLoss of 
Productive 
LandGeneration of 
Construction 
DebrisErosion and 
loss of top 
fertile soilErosion and 
loss of top 
fertile soilReduction 
of ground 
water 
recharge 
area due to 
compactionContaminatio
n by fuel & 
lubricants  
compaction of 
soilContaminatio
n compact ion 
of soilContamina
tion from 
wastes 
disposalSpill 
from 
accident
s
AirDust 
generation 
during 
dismantling, 
handling of 
construction 
materialsReduced 
buffering of 
air & noise 
pollution, 
Hotter, drier 
microclimateDust 
generationAsphalt 
odour and 
emissionNoise, dust 
pollutionNoise, soot, 
odour, dust 
pollutionOdour/Sm
okeNoise, 
dust 
pollutio
n, 
gaseous 
emission
WaterLoss of water 
ResourcesSiltation due 
to loose earthSiltation due 
to loose 
earthAlteration 
of drainage, 
break in 
continuity 
of
ditches 
Siltation, 
Stagnant 
water pools
in quarriesContaminatio
n by fuel & 
lubricantsContaminatio
n by asphalt 
leakage or fuelContamina
tion from 
wastes 
OveruseSpill 
Contami
nation 
by fuel, 
lubricant
s & 
washing 
of 
vehicles
NoiseNoise 
pollutionNoise 
pollution 
due to 
machineryNoise 
PollutionNoise 
PollutionNoise 
PollutionNoise 
Pollutio
nTABLE 174. General  Impacts  on Environment
572
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact Assessment
Environment
-al 
ComponentsPre -
Construct
ion
PhaseConstruction PhaseOperation 
Phase
Land 
acquisitio
nRemoval of 
structuresRemoval of 
trees and 
VegetationEarth works 
including 
quarryingLaying of 
PavementVehicle & 
Machine 
Operation & 
maintenanceAsphalt & 
CrusherSanitation 
& waste 
(labour 
campus)Vehicle 
operation
FloraLoss 
FloraLoss of 
BiomassLowered 
productivity 
loss of 
ground for
vegetation nRemoval of 
VegetationLower 
producti
vity
Use as 
fuel 
woodFelling 
trees for 
FuelImpact of 
pollution on 
Vegetation, 
Toxicity of 
Vegetation
FaunaDisturbance, 
habitat lossDisturbance DisturbanceDisturba
ncePoachingCollision with 
vehicular
traffic
Agricultural 
landChange in 
land useLoss of land
economic 
valueLoss of 
standing 
cropsLoss of 
productiv
e land
Buildings 
and built -
up 
structuresLoss  of 
structures, 
Debris 
generation, 
noise and air
pollutionNoise 
vibration 
may 
cause 
damage 
to
structure
sNoise 
vibration
-
damage 
to 
structure
sVibration and 
Noise
573TABLE 175 . General  Impacts  on Environment
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact Assessment
Environmen
t-al 
ComponentsPre -
Construction
PhaseConstruction PhaseOperation 
Phase
Land 
acquisitionRemoval of 
structuresRemoval of 
trees and 
VegetationEarth works 
including 
quarryingLaying of 
PavementVehicle 
& 
Machine 
Operatio
n & 
maintena
nceAsphalt & 
CrusherSanitation 
& waste 
(labour 
campus)Vehicle 
operation
People and 
communityAnxiety and 
fear among 
communityDisplacemen
t of people 
psychologic 
al
impact on 
people loss 
of livelihoodLoss of 
shade and 
community 
trees,
loss of fuel 
wood and 
fodderNoise & air 
PollutionOdour 
and dustNoise & air 
pollution 
collision with 
pedestrians 
livestock and 
vehiclesCommunit
y
clashes 
with
migrant 
labourNoise 
pollution, 
Risk of 
accidents
Cultural 
assetsDisplacemen
t of
structures 
from Rowloss of 
sacred treesNoise 
vibration 
may cause 
damage
to 
structuresDamage from 
vibration and 
air pollutionDamage 
from 
vibration 
and air 
pollution
Utilities & 
amenitiesInterruption 
in supplyDamage to 
utility and 
amenitiesPressure 
on 
Existing 
amenities
Labour's 
health & 
safetyIncrease of 
Stagnant 
water and
diseasesAsphalt 
odour 
and dustcollision with 
pedestrians
livestock and
vehiclesIncrease in 
communic
able
diseasescollision 
with 
pedestrians
livestock 
and
vehicles574TABLE 176 . General  Impacts  on Environment
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact Assessment
KEY  FINDINGS  OF THE  CONSULTATION
Major  findings  related  to key issues  identified,  till date  during  screening  survey  and detailed  social  survey  (being  carried  out),  such  as 
general  perception  about  the project ; suggestions  to mitigate  hardships  resulting  from  dislocation  and loss of livelihood  are presented  
below :
a. It was observed  that people  are not only  aware  of the project  but also welcomed  the project  in general . However,  some  PAPs  
(People  affected  by a project)  .have  shown  their  concern  due to acquisition  of their  properties .
b. The PAPs  in general  and specially  the legal  titleholders  were  very  much  concerned  about  the mode  of compensation .
c. People  want  that their  views  should  be considered  in every  matter  where  it counts  for new  road  options .
d. They  requested  for facilities  and amenities  like underpasses,  bus stand  and safer  accessibility  at points  of habitant’s  area.
e. Affected  population  wanted  to know  about  the exact  period  when  the work  will start . Sufficient  time  should  be given  before  the 
acquisition  in order  to avoid  any inconvenience .
f. People  requested  about  creation  of employment  opportunities  during  road  construction  and later  phases  of the project .
g. People  suggested  that adequate  safety  measures  should  be provided  such  as speed  breakers,  signage’s  etc. In brief,  it was felt 
during  consultation  that regular  meeting  with  the local  population  / community  could  easily  resolve  any dispute  between  the 
community  people  and implementing  agency  settlements . Service  road  is one of the concerns  of the people . They  wanted  to know  
whether  service  road  is considered  in the design  or not.
h. The RAP  shall  address  the social  issues  brought  to the fore during  the public  consultations .
i. The EMP  – both  generic  and specific  would  be designed  to address  environmental  related  issues .
575
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact AssessmentSummary Of Environmental Monitoring And Documentation Plan
a. Environmental  Monitoring  Program  during  Construction  period  
Based  on the above,  the following  environmental  monitoring  program  during  construction  activities  is proposed  for proposed  
project  Proponent . The monitoring  program  would  be discussed  and approved  by SPCB  and has been  shown  in Table  177
Sr. No. Type Locations Parameters & Frequency Period and Frequency
1DG Stack Emissions 
MonitoringStacks of all operating 
DG setParticulates, SO2, NO2, CO 
QuarterlyAs per CPCB & SPCB 
requirements
2Ambient Air Quality 
MonitoringProject SitePM10, PM2.5, SO2, NO2 and CO 
QuarterlyAs per CPCB & SPCB 
requirements
3 DG Noise MonitoringAll DG sets at Project 
SiteTo check the effectiveness of Acoustic 
enclosure. QuarterlyAs per CPCB & SPCB 
requirements
4 Ambient Noise Monitoring Project siteNoise level both during daytime 
and nighttime QuarterlyAs per CPCB & SPCB 
requirements
5 Water Quality TestingNearest operational bore 
wellDrinking water parameters as per IS 
10500 QuarterlyAs per CPCB & SPCB 
requirementsTable 177 Proposed  Monitoring  Program  for Construction  Phase
Six monthly  Environmental  Compliance  report  to be submitted  regularly  based  on the EC conditions .
576
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact Assessmenta. Post -Project Environmental Monitoring Program
Based on the above, the following post -project environmental monitoring program is proposed for the proposed project. The monito ring 
program would be done as per the standard practice and guidelines of CPCB/SPCB. Monitoring parameters has been shown in Table  178.
S. No. Type Locations Parameters & Frequency Period and Frequency
1 Stack Emissions MonitoringAll Stacks proposed to be 
installed in the project.Particulates, SO2, NO2, CO 
QuarterlyAs per EC Conditions and 
CPCB/ SPCB  
requirements
2Ambient Air Quality 
MonitoringProject SitePM10, PM2.5, SO2, NO2 and CO 
QuarterlyAs per EC Conditions and 
CPCB/ SPCB 
requirements
3 Ambient Noise Monitoring Project siteNoise level (db) both during 
daytime and night time. 
QuarterlyAs per EC Conditions and 
CPCB/ SPCB 
requirements
4 DG Noise Monitoring All DG sets at Project SiteTo check the effectiveness of 
Acoustic enclosure. QuarterlyAs per EC Conditions and 
CPCB/ SPCB 
requirements
5 Water Quality Testing From Drinking Water PointsDrinking water parameters as per 
IS 10500. QuarterlyAs per EC Conditions and 
CPCB/ SPCB 
requirements
6 Treated Wastewater Quality Inlet and outlet of the STPParameters for assessing 
compliance with standards for 
Recycling and horticulture use. 
QuarterlyAs per EC Conditions and 
CPCB/ SPCB 
requirementsTable 178 Proposed  Monitoring  Program  for Operational  Phase
577
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact Assessment ENVIRONMENT  MANAGEMENT  CELL
 An Environment  Management  Cell (EMC)  to be constituted,  which  will be responsible  for implementation  of the EMP  during  
Construction  and Operation  Phase  of the project . The composition  of the proposed  Environment  Management  Cell and 
responsibilities  of its members  and responsibilities  of Environment  Management  cell is mentioned  in Fig. 469.
Senior Executive Director
General Manager 
Environment Manager Medical  Officer
Site Engineers Safety Officer
Assistant Helpers
Figure 469 .General  Structure  of Environment  Management  Cell
578
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact Assessment
Table 179. Responsibilities  of Environment  Management  Cell
S.
No.Designation Proposed  Responsibility
1. Senior  Executive
DirectorEnvironmental  policy  and directions
2. General  Manager Secondary  responsibility  for environment  management
and decision  making  for all environmental  issues
3. Medical  Officer Responsibility  for Health  Hazards  if any.
4. Environment Manager • In-charge of operation of environment management facilities
• Ensuring   legal   compliance   and  interaction   with
regulatory  agencies
5. Safety officer Responsible  for all safety  aspects  at the work  place
6. Site Engineers Ensure  environmental  monitoring  as per requirements
of the statutory  body
7. Assistant  & Helper Will  assist  the seniors  for day-to-day activities.
ENVIRONMENTAL DOCUMENTATION
Documentation  and reporting  of environmental  performance  is an important  management  tool for ensuring  sustainable  operation  
of the proposed  project  both  during  Construction  and operation  Phase . Documents/Records  will be maintained  for regulatory,  
monitoring  and operational  issues . Documentation  requirements  for the proposed  project  by the PP are summarized  in Table  180
579
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact Assessment
Table 180. Environmental  Documentation  for Construction  and Operational  Phase
Parameter Particulars
Air Emissions (incl. Noise) • Consent  to Establish  from  SPCB
• Consent  to Operate  for Air Emissions  from  SPCB
• Operational  details  of DG sets and air pollution  control  equipment  including  number  
of hours  of operation,  fuel usage,  etc.
• Ambient  Air Quality  and DG Stack  Emissions  Monitoring  records
• “Type  Approval  Certificates”  and “Conformance  Labels”  for the DG sets
• Ambient  Noise  Monitoring  Records
Water  Supply • Water  Quality  Monitoring  records
Wastewater Discharges • Consent  to Establish  from  SPCB
• Consent  to Operate  for Wastewater  Discharges  from  SPCB
• Details  of quantity  of wastewater  discharged  from  various  sources  and discharged  from  
the outlet  of the STP  for recycling .
• Operational  details  of STP  including  number  of hours  of operation,  chemical  usage,  in-
process  wastewater  quality,  electricity  requirements  etc.
• Wastewater  Quality  and Quantity  Monitoring  records
Waste Management • Agreement  for disposal  of solid  wastes .
• Wastes  Management  Inventory  including  details  of quantity  of wastes  generated  on-
site and mode  of their  disposal .
• Inventory  of wastes  stored  on-site
• Records  of hazardous  wastes  stored  on-site (in Form -3)
• Annual  Returns  for hazardous  wastes  (in Form -4) to SPCB .
• Annual  Returns  for E-wastes  (in Form -3) to SPCB.
• Documentation  related  to off-site transportation  and
disposal  of hazardous  wastes  (including  Form -9 and Form -10)
580
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact Assessment REPORTING  SCHEDULE
The rational  for a reporting  system  is based  on accountability  to ensure  that the measures  proposed  as part of the Environmental  Monitoring  
Plan  get implemented  in the project  both  during  the Construction  Phase  and Operation  phase . The monitoring  and evaluation  of the 
management  measures  are critical  activities  in implementation  of the project . Monitoring  involves  periodic  checking  to ascertain  whether  
activities  are going  according  to the plans . It provides  the necessary  feedback  for the project  management  to keep  the program  on schedule . 
The rational  for a reporting  system  is based  on accountability  to ensure  that the measures  proposed  as part of Environmental  Management  Plan  
get implemented  in the project .
Sr. No. Details Indicators StageResponsibility
A Pre-Construction  Stage:  Environmental  Management  Indicators  & Monitoring  Plan
1Suitable  location  for dumping  of excavated  soil and wastes  has to 
be identified .Storage Location  for 
Excavated Soil Dumping
LocationsPre- constructio n
Projects / Contractor
2Suitable  location  for construction  worker  camps  have  to be 
identified  (if applicable)  and parameters  indicative  of  
environment  in the
area  has to be reportedConstruction camps Pre- constructio n Projects / Contractor
3Construction  of 10mtr high  wind  breaking  wall  as per the 
Notification    issued    by   the
Government.Wind Breaking  wallPre- constructio n
Projects / Contractor
B Construction  Stage:  Environmental  Condition  Indicators  and Monitoring  Plan
1. Dust  suppression  at construction
siteConstruction
siteConstructio n Projects  /
Contractor
2The parameters  to be monitored  as per frequency,  duration  & 
locations  of monitoring  specified  in the Environmental
 Monitoring
ProgrammeAir qualityConstructio n Projects  
through  
approved  
monitoring
agency
3 Treatment  of sewage  to be generated from the 
Labour camp.Sewage Treatment Constructio n Projects / Contractor
4. Waste  Collection  and disposal from the labour camp Waste management Constructio n Projects / Contractor
5.Suitable  location  for collection  and
storage  of Construction  and Demolition (C&D) 
wasteStorage
location  for C&D  wasteConstructio n Projects / Contractor
6. 05 number  of full grown  Tree Cutting Tree  Cutting Constructio n Projects / Contractor
C Operation  Stage:  Management  & Operational  Performance  Indicators581Table 181. Reporting Schedule
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact AssessmentSr. No. Details Indicators Stage Responsibility
1Solid waste generation, utilization 
and disposalAs per the notifications/ guidelines 
specified by statutory authoritiesOperation EMC
2Hazardous waste re -utilization 
disposal.As per the notifications/ guidelines 
specified by statutory authorities.Operation EMC
3 Stack EmissionsAll parameters as specified for 
stacksOperation EMC
4Meteorology, Ambient air quality, 
Waste water dischargeAll parameters as  specified by 
Statutory AuthoritiesOperation EMC
ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES
The chapter  discusses  how  environmental  parameters  were  assigned  due importance  and were  carefully  considered  in the 
analysis  of alternatives .For this project  no alternative  site will be used
Mitigation, Avoidance and Enhancement Measures
INTRODUCTION
The negative  impacts  of road  projects  can be reduced  or minimized  only  if proper  safeguards  are put in place  during  the design  
and construction  stage  itself . These  can include  reducing  pollutant  discharge  from  the harmful  activities  at source  or protecting  the 
sensitive  receptor . An effective  mitigation  strategy  will utilize  a combination  of both  options  to arrive  at practically  implementable  
measures .
Mitigation Measures Proposed
These  measures  will fully  and adequately  incorporate  in the Environmental  Management  Plan  prepared .
           
Meteorological Parameters
The microclimate  will be likely  to be temporarily  modified  by vegetation  removal,  loss of roadside  plantations  and the addition  of 
increased  pavement  surface . Though  no major  change  in the macro  climatic  setting  (precipitation,  temperature  and wind)  will be 
envisaged  due to the project . 582
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact Assessment
Land
Land  acquisition,  soil erosion  and contamination  of soil can be emerged  as a major  source  of land  impact . But the project  will certainly  
increase  the economic  growth  of that area.
Table 182. Projected  Mitigation  Measures  for Impact  on Land
S.No Particular Reason Mitigation  / Enhancement
1. Change  in GeologyExtraction  of materials 
(borrow earth, coarse and fine 
aggregates)• No blasting  is envisaged.
• Quarry  Development  Plan  need to be enforced.
2. Change in Seismology -• Cross  drainage  structures  are
checked and complied with the seismological 
settings of the region (Zone)
3. Loss  of landLand Acquisition, Change in 
land use pattern• Land acquisition minimized. LA only at locations 
which require geometric  correction  and where 
bypasses are proposed
4. Generation  of DebrisMay contaminate air, water and 
land, if not disposed properly• Disposed  properly  to avoid contamination
5. Soil ErosionRoad slopes and spoils
Construction  of new bridges  and 
culverts Quarry and Borrow 
areas• Residual  spoil  need  to be
disposed  properly
• Silt Fencing  need  to be provided
• Quarries  need  to be reclaimed
6. Contamination of SoilScarified  bitumen wastes
Oil and diesel spills Emulsion
 sprayer and laying  
of hot mix and   Production   of 
hot mix and rejected materials 
Residential facilities for  the 
labour  and officers
Routine  and periodical 
maintenance• Hazardous  Wastes
(Management  and
• Handling)  Rules,  1989  to be enforced.
• Oil Interceptor will be provided for accidental spill 
of oil and diesel
• Rejected  material  will be laid as directed by 
engineer.
• Septic tank will be constructed for waste disposal.
7. Soil quality MonitoringEffectiveness / shortfall  (if any)  
Any unforeseen impact• Measures   will  be  revised   &
Improved to mitigate / enhance environment due to 
any unforeseen impact.
583
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact AssessmentSoil
Table  183 Projected  Mitigation  Measures  for Soil Contamination
Potential  impact Mitigation
Scarified  Bituminous Wastes • No scarification  involved .
• In case concessionaire  decides  to scarify  then  the material  to be reused  in the GSB  layer .
• Non  reusable  Bituminous  wastes  to be dumped  in 30cm thick  clay lined  pits with  the top 
30cm layer  covered  with  good  earth  for supporting  vegetation  growth  over  a period  only  
after  obtaining  permission  of
Independent  Engineer .
Scarified  Non
Bituminous  MaterialUsed  in the normal  GSB  layer  (not the drainage  layer)
Cut material Reused  as embankment,  median  & shoulder  fill materials  Excess  material  to be used  for filling  up 
of borrow  areas  identified  by the concessionaire  and
approved  by the Independent  Engineer
Construction  debris generated from 
dismantling of
structuresGuidelines  for Identification  of Debris  Disposal  Sites  & Precautions  needed  Guideline  for 
Rehabilitation  of Dumpsites  & Quarries  will be applicable
Soil Contamination due  to accident  
spillsAn emergency  response  team  to be created . The team  shall  contain  members  of the district  and 
police  administration  and also have  specialist  in remediation . Responsibility  of Concessionaire  to 
inform  the team  to take actions . The roles  and responsibility  of the members  of the ram shall  be 
framed  in conjunction  with  all the parties  to address  the situation  arising  out of the accidental  
spills  resulting  in situation  like water  and soil contamination,  health  hazards  in the vicinity  of the 
accident  spot,  fire and explosions  etc.
Soil contamination
due to Highway  run offImprovements  of design  shall  lead  to less accidents  and hence less spillage of oil and grease
Soil Contamination during 
construction stage  from  fuel spills• Fuel  storage  will be in proper  bunded  areas .
• All spills  and collected  petroleum  products  to be disposed  off in accordance  with  MoEFCC  
and SPCB  guidelines  and as per the directions  of the Emergency  Response  team .
• Fuel  storage  and fueling  areas  will be located  at least
300m from  all cross  drainage  structures  and significant  water  bodies .
584
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact Assessment
To conserve  the productive  top soil the following  measures  can be proposed:
a) The topsoil  from  all areas  of cutting  and all areas  to be permanently  covered  shall  be stripped  to a specified  depth  of 150mm and 
stored  in stockpiles .
b) To retain  soil and to allow  percolation  of water,  silt fencing  shall  protect  the edges  of the pile.
c) The stockpiles  shall  be covered  with  gunny  bags  or tarpaulin .
d) Such  stockpiled  topsoil  will be returned  to cover  the disturbed  area and cut slopes . Top soil shall  also be utilized  for 
redevelopment  of borrow  areas,  landscaping  along  slopes,  medians,  incidental  spaces  etc.
Soil quality  monitoring  – Mitigation
The quality  of the soil shall  be monitored  to find out the effectiveness  of the mitigation  measures  and further  improvement  in designs  
if required . The monitoring  plan  shall  be functional  in construction  as well  as in operation  stages .
S.No . Item Reason Mitigation  / Enhancement
1. Meteorological  factors  
and climateDue to production and laying  of hot 
bituminous mix• Comprehensive
afforestation
• Avenue  plantation
• Shrub  plantation  in the median /island
2. Dust generation Shifting   of  utilities, removal
 of trees  &
vegetation, transportation  of material• Sprinkling  of Water
• Fine materials  to be 
completely covered, during transport and 
stocking.
• Plant  to be installed in  down wind direction from 
nearby settlement.Table 184. Projected Mitigations Measures for Impacts on Air QualityAir Mitigation  Productive top soil
585
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact Assessment
3. Gaseous pollutants Clearing  and grubbing  materials  
dumping  brushing  of the surface  
access  roads  to borrow  area hot mix 
plants,  Crushers  paving  of asphalt  
layers,  Labour  Camps• Air pollution  Norms  will be
enforced.
• Labourers  will be provided  mask .
• Local  people  will be educated  on safety  and 
precaution  on access
• roads,  newly  constructed  embankment  etc.
4. Air quality emissions Air pollutants  from traffic • Compliance  with  future
statuary
• regulatory  requirements
5. Air quality monitoring Effectiveness  shortfall of any 
unforeseen impact• Measures  will be revised  &
• improved  to mitigate enhance
Apart  from  provision  of the mitigation  measures,  ambient  air quality  shall  be monitored  regularly  during  construction  phase  of the 
project . The monitoring  plan  shall  be functional  in construction  as well  as in operation  stages . The frequency,  duration  and responsibility  
will be as per the Environmental  Monitoring  Plan .Air quality monitoring
Water Mitigation
Table 185. Projected  Mitigation  Measures  for Impacts  on Water
S.
No.Item Reason Mitigation  / Enhancement
1. Loss  of water bodiesPart or complete acquisition 
of
source  of waterLand  acquisition  to be minimized with provision of 
Retaining walls.
Relocation  of ground  / surface water sources
2.Alteration of Cross 
Drainage/RiverMajor  bridge 
constructions  Widening of  minor  
bridges  and
culverts.Widening  & construction  of bridges, there  will be an 
improvement  in the drainage   characteristics   of  the
project  area.
3. Runoff  and drainageSiltation  of water  bodies Reduction in 
ground recharge
Increased drainage dischargeSilt fencing to be provided. Recharge  well  to be 
provided  to compensate  the loss of pervious surface.
Continuous drain is provided, unlined in rural area 
and lined in urban area.
586
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact Assessment
4.Water  requirement  
for projectWater  requirement  for construction  
activity .
Water  requirement  for labour .Contractor  needs  to obtain  approvals  for taking  
adequate  quantities  of water  from  surface  and ground  
water  sources .
This  is required  to avoid  depletion  of water  sources .
Water  harvesting  structures  to be provided .
5.Increased  
sedimentationIncreased  sediment  laden  run-off 
after  the nature  and capacity  of
the watercourseSilt fencing  to be provided  Instructions  given  in 
Guidelines  for Sediment  Control  to be enforced .
6.Contamination  of
WaterScarified  bitumen  wastes  Oil 
and diesel  spills  Emulsion  sprayer  
and laying  of hot mix.
Production  facilities  for the labour  
and officers . Routine  and periodical  
maintenance .Hazardous  wastes  (Management,  Handling  and Trans -
boundary  Movement)  Rules,  2008  to be enforced .
Oil Interceptor  will be provided  for accidental  spill of 
oil and diesel .
Rejected  material  will be laid as directed  by IC.
Septic  tank  will be construction  for waste  disposal .
7.Water  quality  
monitoringEffectiveness  / shortfall  (if any)  Any  
unforeseen  impact .Measures  will be revised  and improved  to mitigate  / 
enhance  environment  due to any unforeseen  impact .
Apart  from  provision  of the mitigation  measures,  water  quality  shall  be monitored  to understand  the effectiveness  and further  
improvement  in designs  in reducing  the concentration  of pollutants . The monitoring  plan  shall  be functional  in construction  as well as in 
operation  stages . The frequency,  duration  and responsibility  will be as per the Environmental  Monitoring  Plan .Water Quality Monitoring
Noise  Mitigation  
The contribution  of project  design  towards  mitigation  of increased  noise  levels  would  be the improved  riding  surface  and geometry,  
which  will reduce  vehicular  noise  generation,  at least  during  the initial  years  after  construction . The mitigation  measures  for noise  are 
essentially  aimed  at protecting  the receptor .
587
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact Assessment
Table  186. Sources  of Noise  Pollution,  Impacts  and Generic  Mitigation  Measures
S.
NoItem Reason Mitigation  / Enhancement
1. Sensitive receptors Increase  in noise pollution  Man,  
material and machinery movements.• Noise  barrier  to be provided
• Traffic  calming  devises  to be used.
• No Horn  Zone  sign Post
2a. Noise Pollution
(Pre- Construction Stage)Establishment  of labour  camps,  
onsite
offices,  stock  yards and  construction 
plants• Area specific and for short duration.
• Machinery  to be checked and complied
• With  noise  pollution 
regulations.
• Camps  to be setup  away from the
• settlements,  in the down wind direction
2b. Noise Pollution 
(Construction Stage)Stone  crushing,
asphalt  production  plant  and batching  
plants,  diesel  generators  etc.
Community  residing  near  to the work  
zones .• Camps  to be setup  away  from  the 
settlements,  in the down  wind  direction .
• Noise  pollution  regulation  to be monitored  
and enforced .
• Temporary  as the work  zones  will be
• Changing  with  completion  of
 construction .
2c. Noise Pollution 
(Operation
Stage)Due to increase  in traffic  (due  to improved  
facility)Will be compensated  with  the uninterrupted
movement   of  heavy   and  light
vehicles
3. Noise Pollution 
MonitoringEffectiveness  / shortfall (if any)
Any unforeseen impactMeasures  will be revised  and improved to
mitigate  / enhance  environment due to any
Unforeseen  impact.
The effectiveness  of mitigation  measures  and further  improvement  in designs  to reduce  the noise  level  due to construction  and 
operational  activity  shall  be monitored . The frequency,  duration  and monitoring  plan  shall  be functional  in construction  as well as in 
operation  stages  as per the Environmental  Monitoring  Plan .
588
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact AssessmentBIOLOGICAL ENVIRONMENT
Flora
The major  adverse  impacts  on flora  shall  involve  the removal  of trees,  shrub  and ground  cover  from  within  the Corridor  of 
Impact .
S.No . Item Reason Mitigation  / Enhancement
1. Forest  area Acquisition  of forest land• Minimum  diversion  of forest land
• Bearing  the cost for NPV
• Bearing  the cost for Compensatory 
Afforestation
2. Wild  LifePresence of Wild Life Sanctuary or National 
Park within 10 Km radius• Not Applicable
3.Trees  CuttingIncrease  in soil erosion, silting of 
water bodies.
Dust  and noise  pollution
Loss  of shade  and loss of tree products• Compulsory  tree plantation
• Option  of compensatory  afforestation  
through  Forest  Department .
• Avenue  plantation  along  corridor,  
where  ever  possible .
• Transplantation  of trees  also explored .
4. VegetationIncrease in soil erosion, silting of water bodies, 
noise pollution, dust pollution• Clearing  and grubbing  will be minimized,  
and sprinkled  with  water  to reduce  dust  
pollution .
• Exposed  surface  like embankment  slopes  
will be protected  with  stone  pitching  and 
turfing .
• Open  land  in and around  plant  will be 
vegetated .
589Table 187. Biological Environment
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact AssessmentFauna
The following  measures  need  to be taken  up during  the construction  stage  by the contractor  and the concessionaire :
▪All works are to be carried out such that minimum damage and disruption to fauna is caused.
▪Construction workers shall be instructed to protect natural resources and fauna, including wild animals and aquatic life.
▪Hunting and unauthorized fishing shall be prohibited.
▪During construction, at any point of time, if a rare / endangered / threatened fauna species is spotted, the contractor and t he 
concessionaire shall make all arrangements to intimate the wild life authorities and measures will be taken as for is conserv ation during 
the operation period also.
SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT
Entire  corridor  will acquire  a pattern  of urban  stretches .
Loss  of land
As far as possible the land acquisition has been kept to the minimum, by restricting the geometric improvement within the exi sting right of 
way.
Community/  cultural  resources
The project  proposes  the relocation  and replacement  of all community  resources  likely  to be impacted . Apart  from  replacing  these  
community  resources  along  the highway  generic  enhancement  measures  will be worked  out for the enhancement  of these  resources .
Risks  associated  – mitigation
The contractor  and the concessionaire  will supply  all necessary  safety  appliances  such  as safety  goggles,  helmets,  masks,  etc., to the 
workers  and staff . The contractor  and the concessionaire  has to comply  with  all regulation  regarding  sage  scaffolding,  ladders,  working  
platforms,  gangway,  stairwells,  excavations,  trenches  and safe means  of entry  and egress .
590
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact Assessment Risks  from  electrical  equipment
Adequate  precautions  will be taken  to prevent  danger  from  electrical  equipment . No material  or any of the sites  will be so stacked  or 
placed  as to cause  danger  or inconvenience  to any person  or the public . All necessary  fencing  and lights  will be provided  to protect  
the public . All machines  to be used  in the construction  will conform  to the relevant  Indian  Standards  (IS) codes .
Risks  at hazardous  activity
All workers  employed  on mixing  asphaltic  material,  cement,  lime  mortars,  concrete  etc., will be provided  with  protective  footwear  and 
protective  goggles . Workers,  who  are engaged  in welding  works,  would  be provided  with  welder’s  protective  eye-shields . Stonebreakers  
will be provided  with  protective  goggles  and clothing  band .
First  Aid
At every  workplace,  a readily  available  first and unit including  an adequate  supply  of sterilized  dressing  material  and appliances  will be 
provided  as per the Factory  Rules . Suitable  transport  will be provided  to facilitate  take injured  or ill person(s)  to the nearest  applicable  
hospital .
Potable  water
In every  workplace  at suitable  and easily  accessible  places  a sufficient  supply  of cold potable  water  (as per IS) will be provided  and 
maintained . If the drinking  water  is obtained  from  an intermittent  public  water  supply  then,  storage  tanks  will be provided .
Hygiene
The Contractor  and the concessionaire  during  the progress  of work  will provide,  erect  and maintain  necessary  (temporary)  living  
accommodation  and ancillary  facilities  for labour  to standards  and scales  approved  by the resident  engineer .
Enhancement
As part of good  environmental  practices,  enhancement  measures  for water  bodies  and community  properties  shall  be drawn  after  
consultations  with  the community .591
Government Department 
PD/CGM (Env)
PCB/ MoEFCC
Govt Department
 Mgr. (Tech)/DGM (Env)Chief Project Manager
(Concessionaire)
Environmental Officer
(Concessionaire)
Environmental OfficerConstruction/Project 
ManagerTeam 
Leader(Independent 
Engineer)
Environmental 
Expert(Independent 
Engineer)
Direct Indirect
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact Assessment
Figure 470. Proposed  Organisation  Chart592
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact AssessmentENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT PLAN
INTRODUCTION
The Environmental  Management  Action  Plan  (EMP)  is required  to ensure  sustainable  development  of the road  during  construction  
and operational  phases . EMP  would  be location  and time  specific . In general,  Government  Department  (with  assistance  from  
Contractor  / Concessionaire  and Independent  Engineer)  is the responsible  entity  for ensuring  that the mitigation  measures  will be 
carried  out. The list provides  reference  (MoRTH  specification),  implementing  organization  and responsible  entity .
Environmental 
Impact  / Aspect Mitigation  Measures Locatio n Time FrameResponsibility
Implementatio n
Geometric 
DesignThe proposed alignment is selected / adjusted 
(within  IRC / MoRTH  specifications)  to minimize 
land disturbance to avoid culturally & 
environmentally sensitive areas – cultural  
properties,  water  bodies  etc.During alignment 
DesignConcessionaire
/ Contractor
Issues  from
stakeholder 
ConsultationsVarious  issues  raised  were  examined  & suitably
Incorporated  based  on merit  & other  road  safety 
measures.During 
DesignConcessionaire
/ Contractor
Impact on 
Cultural 
PropertiesProvide access facilities and / or relocate the 
affected  structure  as per the mitigation  measures 
recommended.All along the 
project
roadDuring alignment 
DesignConcessionaire
/ Contractor
Preservation  of 
treesNo tree will  be cut beyond  toe line.
Identify  incidental  spaces  for plantation  of treesDuring
alignment DesignConcessionaire
/ 
ContractorTable 188. Environmental Management Plan
593
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact Assessment
Environmental 
Impact  / Aspect Mitigation  Measures Locatio n Time FrameResponsibility
Implementatio n
Road  safety
issue due to 
poor  
geometricsDesign  of Geometric  improvements  as per IRC 
codes and MoRTH SpecificationsDuring
alignment DesignConcessionaire
/ 
Contractor
Implementation 
of RAP and LAAll requirements of the RAP shall be complete 
before  start  of construction  stage.  The activities 
broadly include acquisition of structures, cultural 
properties, relocation  of utilities,  common  
property  resources etc.
The land  acquisition  will be done  as per latest  LA 
Act.
Compensation  will be paid  to PAPs  based  on the
RAP  that includes  the Entitlement  Policy.Right  of Way 
(ROW)Before construction 
startsNGOs,
Collaborating 
Agencies, 
Grievance 
Redressal  Cells 
(GRC), District 
Revenue 
authorities
Soil Erosion and 
Sedimentation 
controlMain  reason  of soil erosion  is rains. 
Concessionaire  /Contractor  should  plan  the 
activities  so that No naked  / loose earth surface is 
left out before the onset of monsoon, for 
minimizing the soil erosion following preventive 
measures to be taken such as:
• Embankment  slopes  to be covered,  soon  
after completion.
• Next  layer  / activity  to be planted, soon  after
completion  of clearing  and grubbing,  
laying  of embankment layer.Throughout 
Project corridor, 
Service roads 
and equipment 
storage sites, 
etc.Upon completion
of construction 
Activities at these 
sites.
During constructionConcessionaire / 
Contractor
Relocation  of 
UtilitiesAll community  underground  and overhead  
utilities  will be shifted  as per Utility  Shifting  
Plan,  prior  permission  will be required  from  
regional  offices  of Electricity,  Telecomm -
indications,  OFC,  Water  works  etc.Post  design  to Pre- 
constructionR&R Officer, 
Concessionair e /
Contractor
594
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact AssessmentEnvironmental 
Impact  / Aspect Mitigation  Measures Locatio n Time FrameResponsibility
Implementatio n
Loss  of drinking  
water  sourcePrivate  drinking  water  source  will replace  
according  to RAP  Temporary  arrangements  shall  
be provided,  if the existing  water  supply  is 
disrupted  accidentally .Post  design  to 
Preconstruction - 
on 
Concessionaire 
/
ContractorConcessionair e 
/
Contractor
Cultural  
PropertiesCultural  properties  affected  to be relocated  as per 
RAP  and Public  Consultation . Mitigation  / 
enhancement  measures  will be suggested  for each  
of the cultural  property  individually .Pre- constructionConcessionair e 
/
Contractor
Removal  of 
VegetationVegetation  will be removed  from  the ROW  before  
the commencement  of Construction  after  
obtaining  necessary  permissions  from  the AP 
forest  Department .ROWBefore 
construction 
Starts After center 
line marking at
siteConcessionair e 
/
Contractor
Procurement
of Crushers,  Hot-
mix plants  & 
Batching  Plants,  
other  
construction  
Vehicles,  
Equipment  and
MachinerySpecifications  of crushers,  hot mix plants  and 
batching  plants,  other  Construction  Vehicles,  
Equipment  and Machinery  to be procured  will 
comply  to the relevant  Bureau  of Indian  Standard  
(BIS)  norms  and with  the requirements  of the 
relevant  current  emission  control  legislationsPrior  to 
mobilization at
siteConcessionair e / 
Contractor
Setting  up of 
construction 
campsThe construction  camps  will be located  away  from 
habitations from sensitive locations.
The Concessionaire / Contractor during the 
progress of work will provide, erect and 
maintain necessary (temporary) living 
accommodation and ancillary  facilities  for 
labour  to standards  and scales approved by the 
IE.All areas in immediate 
vicinity of construction 
campsite  chosen by the 
Concessionaire  / 
Contractor and 
approved by the 
Independent
Engineer  (IE).During 
Establishment
, Operation 
And 
Dismantling 
of Such 
Camps.Concessionair e 
/
Contractor
595
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact Assessment
Environmental 
Impact  / Aspect Mitigation  Measures Locatio n Time FrameResponsibility
Implementatio n
Setting up of 
Hot mix Plants 
and crushers 
Identification of 
dumping sitesHot mix plants,  crushers  and batching  plants  
shall be located away from the nearest 
habitation.
The Concessionaire / Contractor shall obtain the 
consent  to operate  the plants  from  the SPCB  and 
submit a copy to the Independent Engineer (IE).All Hot mix 
Plants  
Batching 
PlantsDuring erection, 
testing, operation 
and dismantling 
of such
plantsConcessionair e /
Contractor
Identification of 
dumping sitesLocation of dumping sites shall be finalized 
based on  the guidelines  & the Independent  
Engineer  (IE) shall certify that :
• These  are not located  within  
designated forest areas.
• The dumping  does  not impact  natural  
drainage  courses  and Settlements  are located 
away from the site.Throughout  the 
corridorDuring MobilisationConcessionair e /
Contractor
Clearances and 
approvalsSecure  the following  clearances  prior  to start  of 
construction activity:
• Top soil from  borrow  area,  Debris  
disposal  sites; borrow area, construction 
site to be protected
/covered  for soil erosion.
• Debris due to excavation of foundation, 
dismantling  of existing  cross  drainage  
structure will be removed from the 
water course immediately.
• Diversions  for bridges  will be removed  
from  the water  course  before  the onset  of 
monsoonConstruction stage  
(Prior  to initiation 
of any work).
Time  period  in 
getting the 
permission is 2 -3 
monthsSPCB,CPCB,
Chief Controller 
of Explosives, 
District Collector 
State 
Department of 
Mines, State  
Ground Water
Board,  State 
Irrigation 
Department, 
Labour
Commissioner 
Officer(if
applicable)596
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact AssessmentEnvironmental 
Impact  / Aspect Mitigation  Measures Locatio n Time FrameResponsibility
Implementatio n
Loss of 
agricultural  top 
soilAll areas  of cutting  and all areas  to be permanently covered 
will be stripped.
The stockpiles will be covered with gunny bags or tarpaulin. 
It will be ensured by the Concessionaire / Contractor that 
the topsoil will not be unnecessarily trafficked  either  before  
stripping  or when  in stockpiles.All along  Project  
Corridor,  where  
productive  land  is
acquiredDuring 
constructionConcessionair e /
Contractor
Compaction  of 
Soil and Damage 
to VegetationConstruction  vehicles  should  operate  within  the Corridor 
of Impact avoiding damage to soil and vegetation.
Diversions, access road used will be redeveloped by 
Concessionaire  / Contractor,  to the satisfaction  of the 
owner / villagers.
Construction  vehicle,  machinery  and equipment  shall  move  
or be stationed  in the ROW  only.Throughout  
Project  Corridor  
and all areas  
temporarily
acquired .During 
constructionConcessionair e /
Contractor
Contamination of 
soil• Guidelines of latest “Hazardous Waste 
Management Rule will be enforced.
• Vehicle  / machinery  and equipment  operation,  
maintenance  and refuelling  shall  be carried  out in 
such  a fashion  that spillage  of fuels  and lubricants  
does  not contaminate  the ground . An “oil 
interceptor”  will be provided  for wash  down  and 
refuelling  areas
• Fuel  storage  shall  be in proper  bunded  areas . All 
spills  and collected  petroleum  products  shall  be 
disposed  off in accordance  with  MoEF&CC  and 
SPCB  guidelines  at designated  locations .
• Plant  to be set up away  from  surface  water  body .
• Oil interceptor  will be installed  at construction  site.
• Septic  tank  will be constructed  for safe disposal  of 
waste.At fuel 
storage  
areas  – 
usually  at
construction  
camps,  temporarily  
acquired  siteDuring 
Construction.Concessionair e /
Contractor
597
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact Assessment
Environmental 
Impact  / Aspect Mitigation  Measures Locatio n Time FrameResponsibility
Implementatio n
1. Quarrying
1. Material 
sources• Quarry material shall be sourced from 
approved and  licensed  aggregate  and sand  
quarries.  Copy of licenses to be submitted 
to the IE.
• For operating  new  quarries,  the 
Concessionaire  / Contractor shall obtain 
materials from quarries only after consent 
of the DoF Adequate safety precautions 
shall be ensured during transportation of  
quarry material from quarries to the 
construction site. Vehicles transporting the
• Material  shall  be covered  to prevent  
spillage.During Construction.Concessionair e /
Contractor
Generation  of 
DebrisDebris  generated  due to the dismantling  of the 
existing  pavement structure shall be suitably 
reused in the proposed  construction  as fill 
materials  for embankmentsThroughout
Project 
Corridor.During Construction.Concessionair e /
Contractor
Disposal  of DebrisThe disposal  of debris  shall  be carried  out only  
at sites identified for the purpose.Sites identified  
by the 
Concession aire
/ Contractor & 
approved by the 
Independent 
Engineer
(IE).During 
Construction.Concessionair e /
Contractor
598
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact AssessmentEnvironmental 
Impact  / Aspect Mitigation  Measures Locatio n Time FrameResponsibility
Implementatio n
Equipment 
Selection, 
Maintenance and 
OperationAll vehicles,  equipment  and machinery  used  for 
construction  shall  conform  to the relevant  Bureau  of 
Indian  Standard  (BIS)  norms .
• All vehicles,  equipment  and machinery  used  for 
construction  shall  be regularly  maintained  to ensure  
that pollution  emission  levels  comply  with the 
relevant requirements of SPCB and the Independent 
Engineer (IE).Throughout Project 
Corridor,  all access
roads, sites 
temporarily 
acquired and all 
borrow
areasDuring 
Construction.Concessionair e /
Contractor
Loss  of water 
bodies/ surface / 
ground• No excavation  from  the bund  of the  water  bodies.
• No debris  disposal  near  any water  body.
• Prior  written  permission  from  authorities  for use of 
water for construction activity will be submitted to 
IC.
• Construction labours to be restricted from 
polluting  the source  or misusing  the source.
• Shifting  of source  to be completed  prior  to 
disruption of the actual source.
• Construction  work  shall  be restricted  to 3m – 4m 
width  from  the existing  formation  near  ponds.Near  all water 
bodiesDuring 
constructionConcessionair e /
Contractor
Alteration  of 
drainage• Diversions  will be constructed  during  dry season, 
with adequate drainage facility, and will be 
completely removed before the onset of 
monsoon.
• Debris generated due to the excavation of 
foundation or due to the dismantling of existing 
structure  will be removed  from  the water  course.
• Temporary  Silt fencing  to be provided  on the mouth  
of discharge  into natural  streams.Throughout Project 
Corridor,  all 
access roads, 
temporarily 
acquired sitesWhenever 
encountered 
during 
constructionConcessionair e /
Contractor
599
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact Assessment
Environmental 
Impact  / Aspect Mitigation  Measures Locatio n Time FrameResponsibility
Implementatio n
Runoff  and
drainageThroughout  continuous  drain  is provided.
• Increased  runoff  due to increased  
impervious  surface  is countered  through  
increased  pervious  surface  area through  
soak  pits and rain water  harvesting  
structuresDuring
ConstructionConcessionair e / 
Contractor
Water 
requirement for 
project• Prior  to use of source  Concessionaire  / 
Contractor  will take the written  
permission  from  authority,  to use the 
water  in construction  activity,  and submit  
a copy  to IE.
• During  construction  only  permitted  
quantity  (permission  taken)  from  
approved  sources  will be used .
• Concessionaire  / Contractor  will ensure  
optimum  use of water ; discourage  
labour  from  wastage  of water .Throughout Project 
Corridor,  all access 
roads, temporarily 
acquired sitesDuring 
ConstructionConcessionair e /
Contractor
Contamination of 
water• Measures  suggested  under  
“Contamination  of soil”  will be 
enforced .
• Construction  work  close  to water  
bodies  will be avoided  during  
monsoon .
• Labour  camps  will be located  away  
from  water  bodies .All areas in 
immediate vicinity of 
construction campsite 
chosen
by the Concession aire
/ContractorThroughout 
construction 
period,  During 
Establishmen t,
Operation and 
Dismantling of
Labour
CampsConcessionair e /
Contractor
600
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Environmental Impact AssessmentENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING PROGRAM
MONITORING OF EARTHWORKS ACTIVITIES
Most  of the environmental  problems  related  to the construction  works  may  anticipated  to be associated  with  the earthworks . Details  
regarding  the guidelines  and procedures  adopted  to minimize  the environmental  impacts  of opening,  operating  and closing  of Quarries  and 
Borrow  Areas .
Monitoring of Concessionaire / Contractor’s Facilities, Plant and Equipment
All issues  related  to negative  environmental  impacts  of the Concessionaire  / Contractor's  Facilities,  Plant  and equipment  are to be 
controlled  through :
a.The Concessionaire  / Contractor's  self-imposed  quality  assurance  plan
b.Regular / periodic inspection of the Concessionaire / Contractor’s plant and  equipment
c.Monthly  appraisal  of the Concessionaire  / Contractor.
Other  environmental  impacts  are to be regularly  identified  and noted  on the monthly  appraisal  inspection  made  to review  all aspects  
of the Concessionaire  / Contractor's  operation . The officer  is to review  all monthly  appraisal  reports,  and through  the team  leader  is to 
instruct  the Concessionaire  / Contractor  to rectify  all significant  negative  environmental  impacts .
601
09 .CONCLUSIONS
. 
484Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Conclusions
603Conclusions
The consultants  have  identified  key traffic  issues  and proposed  countermeasures  based  on extensive  traffic  and transportation  surveys,  as 
well  as the Comprehensive  Mobility  Plan  (CMP)  model  for Bangalore . These  measures  aim to enhance  mobility  along  the 18 identified  
corridors .
1.Traffic  Analysis  Findings :
•The traffic  volume -to-capacity  (V/C)  ratios  for all the corridors  have  reached  critical  levels,  with  most  operating  at Level  of Service  
(LOS)  E or F, indicating  severe  congestion . Projections  suggest  that conditions  will deteriorate  further  in the coming  years .
2.Congestion  and Saturation :
•All the identified  corridors  are currently  operating  at full capacity,  with  heavy  congestion  observed  throughout  the day,  
particularly  during  peak  hours .
3.Signal  Optimization :
•Existing  traffic  signals  are incapable  of managing  the high  traffic  volumes . There  is an urgent  need  to replace  them  with  adaptive  
traffic  signal  systems  to better  regulate  vehicular  flow .
4.Intersection  Redesign :
•Several  intersections  along  these  corridors  require  comprehensive  redesigns  and upgrades  to align  with  current  and projected  
traffic  conditions .
5.Reduced  Travel  Speeds :
•During  peak  hours,  vehicle  speeds  on many  corridors  have  dropped  to below  10 km/h,  highlighting  the severity  of the congestion
•The level  of service  is has already  reached  to F and the anticipated  speeds  have  increased  up to 40 kmph  for the year  2051  once  the 
elevated  corridors  are built .
6.Proposed  Long -Term  Solution :
•To address  issues  such  as severe  congestion,  long  queues,  high  stress  levels  for commuters,  and elevated  carbon  emissions,  the 
consultants  have  recommended  the construction  of elevated  corridors . These  structures  aim to provide  seamless  travel  across  the 
city by bypassing  surface -level  traffic  bottlenecks .
•The proposal  includes  approximately  127 kilometers  of elevated  corridors,  supplemented  by two strategic  tunnels :
•A North -South  tunnel  spanning  16 kilometers .
•An East -West  tunnel  extending  28 kilometers .
•Together,  these  measures  are designed  to offer  a sustainable,  long -term  solution  to Bangalore's  mobility  challenges,  ensuring  faster,  
more  efficient,  and less stressful  travel  across  the city.
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Conclusions
The proposed  development  of elevated  corridors,  vehicle  underpasses,  and tunnels  offers  a comprehensive  and lasting  solution  to 
Bangalore's  persistent  traffic  challenges . These  infrastructure  projects  aim to drastically  enhance  travel  efficiency  by increasing  
vehicle  speeds,  improving  road  accessibility,  and significantly  reducing  travel  times . They  are also expected  to minimize  stress  and 
congestion,  lower  vehicle  operating  costs  and fuel consumption,  and contribute  to better  air quality  by cutting  down  emissions .
A network  of approximately  127 kilometers  of elevated  corridors,  underpasses,  and tunnels  is envisioned  to streamline  the city's  
North -South  and East-West  traffic  flows . This  extensive  plan  is designed  to meet  traffic  demands  projected  over  the next  30 years,  
addressing  the city's  ever -increasing  congestion . Among  these,  the proposed  127 kilometers  of elevated  corridors  are set to transform  
Bangalore’s  transportation  landscape  by enabling  vehicles  to bypass  traffic  bottlenecks,  intersections,  and signals,  thereby  ensuring  
an uninterrupted  flow  of traffic . This  will lead  to significant  time  savings,  reduced  fuel consumption,  and lower  vehicular  emissions,  
fostering  a healthier  and more  sustainable  urban  environment .
The project  is meticulously  planned  to strengthen  connectivity  across  the city, linking  key economic  hubs,  residential  zones,  and 
public  amenities . By decongesting  surface  roads,  it will alleviate  the daily  frustrations  of commuters,  providing  faster  and more  
reliable  travel  experiences . Furthermore,  the integration  of these  elevated  corridors  with  existing  public  transit  systems,  such  as the 
metro  rail and bus networks,  will encourage  a shift  toward  multi -modal  transportation  solutions,  reducing  the reliance  on private  
vehicles  and promoting  sustainable  mobility .
Beyond  its immediate  benefits,  this ambitious  initiative  is poised  to drive  Bangalore's  long -term  sustainable  urban  growth . The 
enhanced  mobility  will boost  economic  activity,  attract  investments,  and increase  productivity,  making  the city a more  desirable  
place  to live and work . By accommodating  the rising  population  and growing  vehicular  density,  the elevated  corridors  represent  a 
forward -looking  infrastructure  development  that ensures  both  economic  vitality  and environmental  sustainability .
Once  completed,  these  projects  will not only  address  Bangalore's  pressing  traffic  woes  but also position  the city as a leader  in 
innovative  urban  planning . This  initiative  underscores  a commitment  to creating  a modern,  well -connected,  and commuter -friendly  
metropolitan  area that balances  the needs  of its growing  population  with  environmental  and economic  priorities .
Proposed Elevated Corridors , Underpasses and Tunnel for Bangalore City
Twenty  one (23) Long  term  projects  where  identified  on the corridors  mentioned  in the below  Table  no 2 & 3. these  include  important  arterials  
that carry  significant  traffic  and mass  transit  services  along  the RoW  like buses  and metro
Table 189.  Proposed Corridors in the Study Area
55Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Conclusions
605Sl. No Corridor Length  kms
1 Split Flyover at MEI Junction 0.5
2Yeshwanthpura  ( Mathikere  cross) -IISC -Mekri  circle -Jayamahal -St John Church road -Ulsoor lake -Old 
Madras Road -KR Puram.27
3Integrated Elevation from Hudson Circle to Minarva  Circle ( Minavara  Circle, Bharat -Talks, Shivaji 
Talkies, Town Hall, LIC, Halasuru  Police Station, Hudson Circle, Cubbon  Park)2.7
4Proposed flyover / Underpass at Konankuntae Cross for Through Traffic from Kanakapura to 
Banashankari0.9
5 Proposed  Flyover  at Adayar  Ananda  Bhavan,  Raghuvanahalli , Kanakapura  Road 0.8
6 Proposed  Continuation  of Ananda  Rao Circle  flyover  up to K.R. Circle  towards  Nrupatunga  road 1.7
7 Extension of Existing Madiwala  underpass till Traffic police station junction 0.5
8Elevated Corridor from Hosur Road from Shoolay  circle – Vellara  junction -Anepalya  Junction -
Adugodi  Junction -Forum junction -St.John  Chruch  junction -Madiwala  junction -Silk board Junction7.4
9 Proposed Elevated corridor from Sirsi  Circle to Nayandahalli on Mysuru road 3.5
10Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  from  Old Madras  Road  from   Swami  Vivekananda  Metro  Station  to Silk 
Board  Junction  on Hosur  road   via Indiranagar -Domlur - Madiwala10
11Proposed Elevated Corridor from Nagawara  junction -Ramakrishna HedgedeNagar  Junction -
Sampigehalli -Tirumenahalli -Bellahalli  junction -Bagalur  main road15
12Proposed Elevated Corridor from Maraenahalli main road  from Ragi Gudda to 7th main junction 
thereby connecting Kanakapura main road till Thalghattapura  Nice road via Pipe Line road.10.5
13Proposed  Additional  link road  to KIA,  Elevated  Corridor   from  Outer  Ring Road – Hennur  main  road  
junction  to Bagalur  Junction
 15
Table 190:  Proposed Corridors in the Study Area after  the site reconnaissance Surveys Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Conclusions
606Sl. No` Corridor Length  Kms
14 Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  along  Tannery  road  from  Madava  Mudiliyar  road  to Nagawara  Junction . 5.5
15 Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  from  Yelahanka  New  town  to Kempegowda  International  Airport  Road 4
16Proposed   Elevated  corridor  from  West  of Chord  Road  to Outer  Ring  road  via Pipe  Line  road  (Nandini  
Layout) .4.5
DD1Proposed Double Decker Elevated corridor with Metro line  from Hosahalli to Kadabagere  cross along 
Magadi road crossing ORR and NICE corridor.13
DD2Proposed Double -Decker Corridor in collaboration with Indian Railways, connecting the BEL Road 
intersection to the rear side of Yeshwanthpur Railway Station via Mohan Kumar Road.2.2
T1 Proposed  North  – South  Tunnel  Corridor  from  Hebbal  to Silk Board 18
T2 Proposed  East- West  Tunnel  Corridor  from  K. R. Puram  (I.T.I  Colony)  to Nayandahalli  NICE  intersection 28
Total Length 170.7
Total Length of Tunnels 46
Total length of Elevated corridors/ Double Deckers/ Underpasses 124.7
"The  corridor  spans  a total  of 0.5 kilometers , featuring  a four -lane,  two-way  Split  flyover . Approximate  
cost is ₹ 60 Crores  Corridor 1: Construction of Split Flyover at MEI intersection on Tumakuru road
MEI Intersection
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Conclusions
607Figure 471. Key Map of  proposed Split flyover at MEI intersection on Tumakuru road
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Conclusions
608
Yeshwanthpura
IISCMekri  
Circle
Cantonmen
t Halasur LakeCorridor 2: K R Puram -Old Madaras road -Ulsoor lake -St.John  Chruch  road -Jaymahal  road -Mekhri  circle -
IISC -Yeshwanthapura  ( Mathikere  cross) - 27 kms
Figure 472. Key Map of Proposed  Elevated Corridor from Tumakuru Road to Old Madras Road"The  corridor  spans  a total  of 27 kilometers , featuring  a four -lane. Approximate  cost is ₹ 3240 Crores  
"The  corridor  spans  a total  of 2.7 
kilometers , approximate  project  cost is 
324 croresCorridor  3: Integrated  Elevation  from  Hudson  Circle  to Minerva  Circle  (Minerva  Circle,  Bharat -Talks,  
Shivaji  Talkies,  Town  Hall,  LIC,  Halasuru  Police  Station,  Hudson  Circle,  Cubbon  Park)
Minerva CircleHudson CircleNrupatunga  Rd
Kasturba rd
R.R.M Roy RdD.C  Office Rd
Sirsi  Flyover Connecting Ramp
N.R rdLevel 2Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Conclusions
609Figure 473. Key Map of  proposed Elevated Corridor from Minerva circle to Hudson circle
Corridor 4: Konanakuntae  Cross Signal, Kanakapura Road
"The  corridor  spans  a total  of 0.9 kilometers , featuring  a four -lane  split  flyover  . Approximate  cost is ₹ 108 
Crores  
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Conclusions
610Figure 474. Key Map of  proposed split flyover at Konanakuntae  Cross Signal, Kanakapura Road
Corridor 5: Adayar Ananda Bhavan, Raghuvanahalli , Kanakapura Road
"The  corridor  spans  a total  of 0.8 kilometers , featuring  a four - lane Split  flyover  Approximate  cost is ₹ 96 Crores  
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Conclusions
611Figure 475. Key Map of  proposed split flyover at Adayar Ananda Bhavan, Raghuvanahalli, Kanakapura Road
"The  corridor  spans  a total  of 1.7 kilometers , featuring  a four -lane,  two-way divided  elevated  structure . 
The estimated  project  cost is approximatel y ₹204 crores."Corridor 6: Continuation of Ananda Rao Circle flyover up to K.R. Circle
Anand Rao Circle
K.R. CircleFreedom ParkMaharani’s College
Nrupatunga  RoadVidhanasoudha
M.S Building
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Conclusions
612Figure 476. Key Map of  proposed elevated corridor from Ananda Rao Circle flyover up to K.R. Circle
Corridor  7 :  Madiwala  underpass  extension  till Silk  Board
Silk BoardMadiwala
""The  corridor  spans  a total  of 0.5 kilometers , featuring  a four -lane,  two-way  divided  underpass . Cut and Cover,  
approximate  cost is ₹ 60 crores . Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Conclusions
613Figure 477. Key Map of  proposed underpass from Madiwala  underpass extension till Silk Board
"The  corridor  spans  a total  of 7.4 kilometers , featuring  a four -lane,  two-way  divided  elevated  structure . The 
estimated  cost of the project  is approximately  ₹888 crores."Corridor 8: Hosur Road from Anepalya  Junction -Adugodi  Junction -Forum junction -St.John  Chruch  
junction -Madiwala junction - Silk board Junction.
Anepalya  JunctionSilk Board Junction
Adugodi  JunctionForum MallMadiwala  Junction
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Conclusions
614Figure 478. Key Map of  proposed elevated corridor from Hosur road to Old Madras road
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Conclusions
615Figure 479. Key Map of  proposed elevated corridor from Sirsi  circle to Nayandahalli
Corridor  9: Elevated  corridor  from  Sirsi  circle  to Nayandahalli
Sirsi  Circle
NayandahalliDeepanjalinagar
""The  corridor  spans  a total  of 3.5 kilometers , featuring  a four-lane,  two-way  elevated  corridor . The estimated  of the 
project  is approximately  ₹420 crores."

Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Conclusions
616Figure 480. Key Map of  proposed elevated corridor from Hosur road to Old Madras roadCorridor 10: Old Madras Road,Vivekananda  Metro Station to Silk Board Junction via Indiranagar -
Domlur - Madiwala
MadiwalaDomlurCMH HospitalOld Madras Road
Silk Board
"The  corridor  spans  a total  of 10 kilometers , featuring  a two-lane,  elevated  structure . The estimated  cost of the project  is approximately  
₹1200  crores."

"The  corridor  spans  a total  of 15 kilometers , featuring  a four -lane,  two-way  divided  elevated  structure . The estimated  
cost of the project  is approximately  ₹1, 800 crores."Corridor 11: Integrated Elevated flyover from Nagawara junction -Ramakrishna Hedgede  Nagar Junction -
Sampigehalli -Tirumenahalli -Bellahalli  junction -Bagalur main road.
Nagawara junctionBaglur  Main road
ThanisandraRamakrishna Hegde
 Nagar Tirumenahalli Bellahalli  junction
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Conclusions
617Figure 481. Key Map of  proposed elevated corridor from Nagawara  to Baglur  main road 
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Conclusions
618Figure 482. Key Map of  proposed elevated corridor form Marenahalli  main road connecting Kanakapura  main road -Thalghattapura  Nice road.  
"The  corridor  spans  a total  of 10.5 kilometers , featuring  a four -lane,  two-way  divided  elevated  structure . 
The estimated  cost of the project  is approximately  ₹1260 crores."Corridor  12: Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  from  Maraenahalli  main  road   from  Ragi  Gudda  to 7th main  junction  thereby  
connecting  Kanakapura  main  road  till Thalghattapura  Nice  road  via Pipe  Line  road .
Marenahalli
Thalghattapura  
Nice road.Yelachenahalli
Konankuntae Cross
Doddakallasandra

Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Conclusions
619Figure 483. Key Map of  proposed elevated corridor form Hennur  to Bagalur  Corridor 13: Proposed Elevated Corridor from  Hennur to Bagalur - Alignment details
Bagalur
Hennur
"The  corridor  spans  a total  of 15 kilometers , featuring  a four -lane,  two-way  divided  elevated  structure . 
The estimated  cost of the project  is approximately  ₹1800 crores."

Nagawara Junction
M.M. RoadComprehensive Traffic Management Plan Conclusions
Corridor  14: Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  from  Maraenahalli  main  
road   from  Ragi  Gudda  to 7th main  junction  thereby  connecting  
Kanakapura  main  road  till Thalghattapura  Nice  road  via Pipe  Line  
road .
"The  corridor  spans  a total  of 5.50 kilometers , 
featuring  a four -lane,  two-way  divided  elevated  
structure . The estimated  cost of the project  is 
approximately  ₹ 660 crores."
Figure  484. Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  from  Maraenahalli  main  road   
from  Ragi  Gudda  to 7th main  junction  thereby  connecting  Kanakapura  
main  road  till Thalghattapura  Nice  road  via Pipe  Line  road .
Yelahanka Old townKogilu  Cross KIA RoadCorridor 15: Proposed Elevated corridor from Yelahanka Old Town to Kempe Gowda  International 
Airport road  – 4 kms
621Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Conclusions
"The  corridor  spans  a total  of 4 kilometers , featuring  a four-lane,  two-way  divided  elevated  structure . The 
estimated  cost of the project  is approximately  ₹ 480 crores."
Figure 485. Key Map of Proposed Elevated corridor from Yelahanka Old Town to Kempe Gowda International Airport road 
ORRWest of Chord roadCorridor  16: Proposed  Elevated  corridor  from  West  of Chord  Road  to Outer  Ring  road  via Pipe  Line  
road  (Nandini  Layout )- 4.5 Kms
622"The  corridor  spans  a total  of 4.5 kilometers , The estimated  project  is approximately  ₹ 540 crores."
Figure 488. Key Map of Proposed Elevated corridor from West of Chord Road to Outer Ring road via Pipe Line road (Nandini Layout) - Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Conclusions

Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Conclusions
Double Decker 01 : Proposed Double Decke r Corridor from Hosahalli to Kadabagere  cross near Seegehalli  along 
Magadi road - Integrated with METRO  
"The  corridor  spans  a total  of 13 kilometers , The estimated  project  is approximately   ₹1560 crores."
623Figure 486. Key Map of  proposed elevated corridor form Hennur  to Bagalur  
HosahalliKadabagere  Proposed Double DeckerNICE roadOuter Ring Road

Yeshwanthapura Railway StationBEL RoadDouble Decker  2: Proposed Double -Decker Corridor in collaboration with Indian Railways, connecting the BEL 
Road intersection to the rear side of Yeshwanthpur Railway Station -  Integrated with Indian Railways
624Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Conclusions
"The  corridor  spans  a total  of 2.2 kilometers , The estimated  project  is approximately   ₹264 crores."
Figure 487. Key Map of Proposed Double -Decker Corridor in collaboration with Indian Railways, connecting the BEL Road 
intersection to the rear side of Yeshwanthpur Railway Station -  Integrated with Indian Railways
Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Conclusions
Tunnel  01 :North -South  Tunnel  Corridor  from  Hebbal  to Silk  Board
""The  corridor  spans  a total  of 18 kilometers . The estimated  cost per kilometer  is approximately  ₹889 crores , bringing  
the total  project  cost to ₹16,000 crores."
625Figure 489. Key Map of  proposed underground Tunnel NORTH -SOUTH Corridor from Hebbal to Silk Board

Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Conclusions
626Figure 490. Key Map of  proposed underground Tunnel EAST -WEST Corridor from Hebbal to Silk Board
Tunnel  02: East - West  Tunnel  Corridor  from  K.R.Puram  to Nayandahalli
""The  corridor  spans  a total  of 28 kilometers . The estimated  cost per kilometer  is approximately  ₹889 crores , bringing  
the total  project  cost to ~₹25,000 crores."ITI Colony – K.R Puram
Nayandahalli – NICE 
intersectionDomlur
Lal Bagh

Comprehensive Traffic Management Plan Conclusions
Table 191.Total Cost Summary for the proposed  Elevated Corridors, Underpasses and Tunnels
Sl. No Corridor LengthCost in Crores
1 Split Flyover at MEI Junction 0.5 60
2Yeshwanthpura ( Mathikere cross) -IISC -Mekri circle -Jayamahal -St John Church road -Ulsoor lake -Old 
Madras Road -KR Puram.273240
3Integrated Elevation from Hudson Circle to Minarva Circle (Minavara Circle, Bharat -Talks, Shivaji 
Talkies, Town Hall, LIC, Halasuru Police Station, Hudson Circle, Cubbon Park)2.7324
4Proposed flyover / Underpass at Konankuntae Cross for Through Traffic from Kanakapura to 
Banashankari0.9108
5 Proposed Flyover atAdayar Ananda Bhavan, Raghuvanahalli, Kanakapura Road 0.8 96
6 Proposed  Continuation  of Ananda  Rao Circle  flyover  up to K.R. Circle  towards  Nrupatunga  road 1.7204
7 Extension of Existing Madiwala underpass till Traffic police station junction 0.5 60
8Elevated Corridor from Hosur Road from Shoolay circle – Vellara junction -Anepalya Junction -Adugodi 
Junction -Forum junction -St.John Chruch junction -Madiwala junction -Silk board Junction7.4
888
9 Proposed Elevated corridor from Sirsi Circle to Nayandahalli on Mysuru road 3.5 420
10Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  from  Old Madras  Road  from   Swami  Vivekananda  Metro  Station  to Silk 
Board  Junction  on Hosur  road   via Indiranagar -Domlur - Madiwala101200
11Proposed Elevated Corridor from Nagawara junction -Ramakrishna HedgedeNagar Junction -
Sampigehalli -Tirumenahalli -Bellahalli junction -Bagalur main road151800
12Proposed Elevated Corridor from Maraenahalli main road  from Ragi Gudda to 7th main junction 
thereby connecting Kanakapura main road till Thalghattapura Nice road via Pipe Line road.10.5
1260
13Proposed  Additional  link road  to KIA,  Elevated  Corridor   from  Outer  Ring  Road  – Hennur  main  road  
junction  to Bagalur  Junction
 15 1800
14 Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  along  Tannery  road  from  Madava  Mudiliyar  road  to Nagawara  Junction . 5.5660
15 Proposed  Elevated  Corridor  from  Yelahanka  New  town  to Kempegowda  International  Airport  Road 4
480
16Proposed   Elevated  corridor  from  West  of Chord  Road  to Outer  Ring  road  via Pipe  Line  road  (Nandini  
Layout) .4.5
540
DD1Proposed Double Decker Elevated corridor with Metro line  from Hosahalli to Kadabagere  cross along 
Magadi road crossing ORR and NICE corridor.131560
DD2Proposed Double -Decker Corridor in collaboration with Indian Railways, connecting the BEL Road 
intersection to the rear side of Yeshwanthpur Railway Station via Mohan Kumar Road.2.2264
T1 Proposed  North  – South  Tunnel  Corridor  from  Hebbal  to Silk Board 18 15000
T2Proposed  East- West  Tunnel  Corridor  from  K. R. Puram  (I.T.I  Colony)  to Nayandahalli  NICE  
intersection2825000
Total Length 170.7 54964
Total Length of Tunnels 46 40000
Total length of Elevated corridors/ Double Deckers/ Underpasses 124.7 14964
Government  of Karnataka

===== END FILE: r5_final_feasibility_report_19_12_2024-compressed.pdf =====
